1.2 Spotting a business opportunity 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which an 
enterprise and an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business 
environment and how this might impact on small business opportunities. Students must be aware of 
this topic’s relationship with the other topics in this theme and how these areas may impact on business 
decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Customer needs Being aware of different customer needs such as price, quality, choice and 
convenience 
The importance of fulfilling customer requirements 
Market research Objectives of market research 
Methods and techniques 
Qualitative versus quantitative research 
Use of social media in market research 
Importance of reliable data 
Segmentation Benefits and methods of segmentation 
Market mapping to identify gaps in the market 
The competitive 
environment 
Strengths and weaknesses of competition 
How competition affects business decisions 
 
Customer needs 
In order to successfully sell a product or service, a business will need to know what its customer needs 
are. These can be summarised as: 
providing the right product, of the right quality, at the right price,  
at the right time, in the right place 
These can be explained in a little more detail: 
Quality: customers will want the product to be of the quality that they require and expect. This is not 
necessarily high quality, as they may be happy with a cheaper product of a reasonable quality. There 
will be some legal requirements related to quality, covered later in this companion.  
Price: Customers will expect to pay a reasonable price for the good or service. Price can vary depending 
on quality, timing, delivery arrangements and the popularity of the particular item. The price of rush 
hour trains is a good example of how price can change according to different circumstances, in this 
instance – the time of day! 


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 13  
Competition and choice: Most customers would like to have a range of options for their possible 
purchase. This could include different brands, different quality and price combinations and even 
different varieties of the same product. 
Convenience: The growth in on line shopping and home delivery highlights how customer needs have 
changed in recent years. Most successful retailers will now have websites and e-sales options that are 
more convenient and increasingly expected by customers. Opening hours and location are also factors 
that are affected by customer needs. 
Meeting customer needs 
Customers are arguably the most important stakeholder in a business. Without customers there is no 
business.  
Historically many businesses were more production focused. They produced what they were good at 
producing and customers purchased the goods because there was no choice. In the global economy that 
we now live in, this is not an option. There is too much competition and businesses spend large 
amounts of time and money being customer focused.  
A new entrepreneur will start with finding out and identifying what a customer wants and needs 
through market research. He/she will then design a good or service that meets these needs and decide 
on a price to charge that customers are prepared to pay. This will help the business to generate sales 
early on and continue to make sales, which will help to secure the survival of the business. 
Market research 
Initially, the entrepreneur comes up with what he/she believes is a good business idea.  But, how does 
the entrepreneur check that this business idea will actually meet customer needs and therefore has the 
potential to become a viable business?  The answer is for the entrepreneur to conduct some market 
research. 
Market research for a start-up or small business needs to focus on the fundamental issues, such as: 
 How big the market is (measured by sales or volume) 
 How fast the market is growing and the potential for the market to grow further  
 Who the existing competitors are and their share of the market 
 How the market is divided up into segments, for example low price or high quality 
 What kind of customers there are in the market.  It is important for a business to know what 
their customer preferences are in terms of when and where they buy, and the prices they wish 
to pay 
An entrepreneur needs to be satisfied that there is sufficient demand for the product before the 
business sets up.  However, at the start-up stage, funds are often in short-supply, which restricts how 
much market research an entrepreneur can carry out. Because of this, the entrepreneur should ensure 
that he/she is conducting effective market research i.e. ensuring he/she has the right information to 
make good decisions, rather than being overwhelmed with too much information taken from detailed 
reports and statistics.  
It is worth remembering that a small business can learn much about the market by simply trading, 
talking to customers and suppliers on a frequent basis and reading the trade newspapers and 
magazines. This type of market research is not only cheap or even free, but is very effective and will 
help the entrepreneur to recognise what the business is doing right and what changes it should make. 


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 14  
Purpose of market research 
The aim of market research is to gather information. This will enable the business to be informed in its 
decisions and so reduce the risk of failure. Businesses will produce goods and services that the 
customers want at a price they can afford. This will not just be based on guess work, but on accurate 
and up to date data.  
The following list describes some of the areas that market research can be used for: 
 Customers/target market – what type of person will buy the product or are currently buying it? 
What price will they pay and what features do they expect? Where would they like to purchase 
the product? Overall, market research should be used to identify and understand customer 
needs as exactly as possible 
 Promotion – how do my customers find out about products such as mine? 
 Identifying a gap in the market – which firms are my rivals? What prices do they charge and 
what are their products like? Is there room in the market for a new business to open up offering 
a similar product? 
 Demand – how will customer needs change in the future? Are incomes increasing? How will 
technology change what customers want and how they expect to buy it? 
Limitations of market research 
No market research will be completely accurate. If it is concerned with the current market, it will 
normally be based on data from a sample of the market. This may or may not be accurate. Costs will 
restrict the quantity and frequency of market research and researching future markets may not turn out 
as predicted. Rate of change in a market may also make research of limited value. In the IT industry, this 
has meant some businesses being more producer focussed in bringing out new models, rather than 
seeing what customers want first and then developing products to meet these specific needs. 
Primary and secondary research data 
An important distinction can be made between two broad kinds of market research data: 
• Primary data: data collected first-hand for a specific purpose by the business 
• Secondary data: research data that already exists that has been collected for a different purpose 
Primary research can be designed to get exactly the data a business needs. The problem with this form 
of research, however, is that it is usually time-consuming and expensive.  Getting a market research 
agency to conduct the primary research is one option often undertaken by big businesses, but the costs 
are high and the business must wait for the results.  Often for new businesses, primary research is done 
by the entrepreneur, often informally through speaking to potential customers or completing basic 
surveys or questionnaires. 
There are various methods of primary research: 


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 15  
Observation, for example 
counting customers, 
watching what they buy 
and when; can also use 
video recordings or sales 
data from till readings for 
example 
Works well in retail markets, for 
example sit outside a shop and 
watch how many people walk by, 
look at the window displays, stock 
layout etc.  
Can see what consumers buy, 
rather than what they say they will 
buy! 
Expensive and time consuming, 
though larger businesses will use 
data from tills which can provide 
detailed sales records.  
Surveys and 
questionnaires 
Surveys are the process 
of getting market data, 
often using a 
questionnaire and 
analysing the results  
Questionnaires can be undertaken 
by post, by telephone, face to face 
or more commonly online. These 
can be given to existing and 
potential customers. 
They are relatively cheap and can 
produce good quality data, if the 
sample size is large enough. 
Data collected is usually 
quantitative and therefore easy to 
analyse. 
Questions need to be well 
designed, but reply rates are often 
very low, especially for telephone 
and postal methods.  
They can be expensive and time 
consuming for a large sample to 
be obtained which truly 
represents the views of the 
general population.  
Interviews 
These are often 
conducted face to face, 
but can also be 
conducted by phone 
This is a good way to get detailed 
insights from an individual.  
Answers can be checked and 
followed up. 
These are often used in 
combination with questionnaires. 
Interviews are costly in terms of 
time and may be 
unrepresentative, as only small 
numbers will be undertaken.  
Results can be influenced by the 
researcher asking leading 
questions. 
Focus groups  
Groups of actual or 
potential customers are 
brought together to 
discuss a product or 
market 
Focus groups are a good way of 
getting detailed information about 
customer tastes and preferences. 
They provide detailed information 
and opinions.  
These can be costly and time 
consuming to conduct and need 
careful management to keep 
individual opinions independent 
of others opinions.  
Only a small amount of data is 
collected, so may not reflect the 
viewpoints of others fully. 
 
Secondary research 
For new businesses, secondary research will be the main source of market research.  This is because it 
costs less and is quicker and easier to obtain.  Examples of secondary research, which can often be 
obtained free using the internet or by visiting local libraries, are: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 16  
 
Government information 
 
Provide detailed insights on the economy and on many industry sectors. 
There is also population data published by the government based on the 
census. 
Competitor websites  Valuable information on marketing activities of competitors including 
their products, prices and promotional activities and materials. This may 
include product ratings, which are often independent. 
Customer reviews The internet provides data from product users who give ratings and 
feedback about a particular product. In some cases these are 
independent sites e.g. Trip Advisor, in other cases they are provided by 
the business itself e.g. Amazon. 
Trade associations, trade 
press and magazines 
Most industries have an industry association - they are a good source of 
market analysis, which is particularly useful for new businesses which 
may have little or no experience of the market. 
Newspapers (printed 
press) 
Financial and economic information is provided on a daily basis. 
Newspapers provide local, national and international data which is up to 
date. They also provide case studies of other local businesses. 
Market research reports Organisations such as Mintel and Keynote produce a wide variety of 
expensive reports that analyse individual markets. 
Benefits and drawbacks of secondary research 
By its nature, secondary research will vary in terms of its usefulness. Some drawbacks are as follows: 
 The research has been created for a different user and a different purpose, so may not be 
exactly what the business is looking for 
 Data may be out-of-date, as it will have been completed in the past 
 Information might be biased, because of its previous use or inaccuracy 
 Data is generally available to everyone, so competitors will see the same information 
However, secondary research has many benefits particularly to a new business: 
 The information is readily available, particularly online, so research can be done quickly 
 It is generally cheaper than primary research and in many cases it is free 
 Good secondary research provides an excellent overview of a target market and can save time 
compared to primary research, particularly if the market is distant or spread over a wide area 
Quantitative and qualitative market research 
The distinction between primary and secondary research is really about the different sources of market 
information.  A different way of thinking about market research is to consider two main approaches – 
qualitative and quantitative market research.   
Qualitative research 
Qualitative research is based on opinions, attitudes, beliefs and intentions.  This kind of research deals 
with questions such as “why?”, “would?” or “how?” 


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 17  
Qualitative research aims to understand why customers behave in a certain way or how they may 
respond to a new product.  Given that these opinions are often obtained from small numbers of people, 
the findings are not necessarily statistically valid and may be difficult to draw conclusions from.  
However, such data can highlight potential issues, which can then be explored through quantitative 
research. 
Focus groups and interviews are common methods used to collect qualitative data. This kind of data is 
often revealing and useful, but it is costly and time-consuming to collect, particularly for a start-up. 
Quantitative research 
This is research based on larger samples and therefore should be more reliable, but it can be time 
consuming to analyse and carry out. Quantitative research is concerned with data and addresses 
questions such as “how many?”, “how often”, “who?”, “when?” and “where?” Questionnaires, that 
contain closed questions, are the most common method to gain quantitative market research. 
The results of quantitative research will generally be in numerical form, for example: 
• 35% of customers rate the new product as “attractive” 
• 70% of potential customers use the internet to buy their hotel accommodation in Dorset 
• 3 out of 5 customers will buy a new food product after being offered a free in-store sample 
• Average ratings of a product are 8.5 out of 10 
Social media and market research 
Most market research is out of date before it can be used. It takes time to collect, analyse and present 
findings. Social media, as a form of market research, has many advantages compared to more 
conventional methods:  
 It is very quick. If a small business uses Facebook and/or Twitter then reactions to new products 
or situations will be on Facebook in minutes and can provide instant feedback 
 Provides an insight into the market in which the business is competing through the social media 
of competitors 
 There are free tools available that allow businesses to collect social media statistics. Although 
there will be some costs incurred by the business in terms of staff time analysing this data, 
overall using social media will be very much cheaper than undertaking questionnaires, surveys 
and consumer panels.  
 Users are engaged in the comments process and will interact with the business and each other. 
Comments can also be followed up, for example using Facebook private messaging, to gain 
further data and information. 
 Can allow links to the promotional use of social media which may form part of the firm’s overall 
marketing plan. 
However, there are disadvantages:  
 Although it is claimed that 80% of people with internet access engage with social media, it is 
much harder for a business to engage with its actual and potential customers. This could mean 
that the feedback provided through social media comments is not representative of actual 
opinions and may just represent a small number of comments of people who do not like change 
or new ideas. 
 There is a danger of social media becoming too negative and this message spreading very quickly 
in a viral fashion. 


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 18  
 There will be a need for staff training involved in this process, which will increase costs and be 
time-consuming.  
 For a small business, the monitoring of social media can become very time-consuming, which 
can detract from other important roles in the firm. 
Reliability of Data 
Important business decisions will be made on the basis of market research and therefore it is vitally 
important that it is reliable. Reliability will mean that the results indicate the true situation that the 
research is trying to find out, for example, the research reflects the views of the whole target market 
accurately. 
However, there are many different reasons why market research results might not be reliable. These 
can be summarised as follows: 
Bias: Most market research involves taking samples. The choice of these samples may well involve some 
bias either through the time, location or type of people chosen. Smaller samples are more likely to be 
biased, but large samples are expensive and time-consuming to conduct. 
Out of date: Any research will be out of date once it has been collected. But some, especially secondary 
data, can be very out of date and not a reliable representation of the current situation facing a business. 
This can result in incorrect decisions being made.  
Inaccurate: Either the question or the answers can result in inaccuracies. If the question is not clear, 
then the answers given will be of little use. Quantitative data will often have numerical scores rating 
products, but these often mean different things to different people. For example, some people will not 
give 5*s, whilst others will. Qualitative data will give people’s opinions, but the opinions given may not 
cover all the areas required and respondents may be reluctant to make negative comments, particularly 
if interviews are conducted face to face. 
There are many examples where specialist market research companies get it wrong, so small and new 
businesses must be particularly careful not to base too much of their decision making on too little 
market research. 
 
Market segmentation 
Once a business has undertaken market research, it will have a clearer idea of who its customers or 
potential customers are likely to be. The business may then decide to concentrate on certain groups of 
customers, in order to gain some advantage over its competitors. This also means that the business can 
develop some expertise and reputation when targeting this specific group.  
This means that most businesses do not try and sell to the whole market population. They choose a 
smaller part or segment of the market to concentrate on. This is particularly the case with small 
business start-ups. Businesses are then in a better position to meet their distinct customer needs more 
exactly. 
The table below summarises some of the benefits to a business of segmenting the market: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 19  
 
Better matching of 
customer needs 
Customer needs differ; creating separate products for each segment 
provides customers with a better opportunity to buy products that meet 
their specific needs; this will increase sales 
Better opportunities for 
growth 
Market segmentation can build sales, for example customers can be 
encouraged to "trade-up" after being introduced to a particular product 
with an introductory, lower-price 
More effective 
promotion 
By segmenting markets, the target customers can be reached more often 
and at lower cost, as there is less waste in the promotion used 
Gain a higher share of the 
market 
Through careful segmentation and targeting, businesses can often 
become the market leader, even if the market is small 
There are many ways in which a market can be broken down into segments. 
A very popular method of “demographic” segmentation looks at factors such as age, gender, and 
income. These are described briefly here, along with other common methods of market segmentation: 
Gender We all know that males and females demand different types of the same product; 
great examples include the clothing, hairdressing, magazine, toiletries and 
cosmetics markets 
Age Businesses often target certain age groups; good examples are toothpaste, look at 
the variety of toothpaste products that are available to buy that target children and 
adults, and toys, for example pre-school, age 5-9, age 10-12, teenagers and family! 
Location Another approach is known as geographic segmentation, which will divide the 
market up by area. This could be as wide as a country or continent, for example the 
“European market”, but for some small businesses it could just be the local town or 
village, which usually relates to small service businesses such as shops and cafes 
Social class Many businesses believe that a consumers "perceived" social class influences their 
preferences for cars, clothes, home furnishings, leisure activities and other 
products and services 
Income Because it is perfectly possible to earn large sums of money in all occupational 
classes, segmentation by income level is also undertaken. Producers of luxury 
goods and services will often use this type of segmentation, so that they do miss 
out on potential customers 
Lifestyle This method of segmentation is where potential consumers are grouped by their 
activities, interests and opinions; examples include hobbies, types of holiday 
preferred or whether people are interested in politics or not 
Limitations of segmentation 
Whilst it is possible for small businesses to gain considerable benefits from segmenting the market 
there are however some disadvantages: 
 Lack of information and data: some markets are poorly researched with little information about 
different customer needs and wants. This is particularly relevant for small businesses, where any 
research conducted may be inaccurate, insufficient or out of date. 


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 20  
 Difficulty in measuring and predicting consumer behaviour: humans don’t all behave in the 
same way all of the time. The way that they behave also changes over time.  A good example is 
the “grey generation” i.e. people aged over 50.  The attitudes and lifestyles of the grey 
generation have changed dramatically in recent years. This can lead to missing potential 
customers through inappropriate targeting with relevant products.  
 Customer segments can be hard to reach, once they have been identified: it is one thing 
spotting a segment; it is another finding the right way to reach target customers with the right 
kind of marketing message in that segment! They may be difficult to reach and inform about 
goods or services. 
 All market objectives: some small businesses will not just want to target one segment; they may 
have ambitions on a bigger scale, so will be looking to expand their geographical area or the type 
of customer.  
Market mapping 
Once an entrepreneur has identified an appropriate segment of the market to target, the challenge is to 
position the product so that it meets the needs and wants of the target customers. 
One way to do this is to use a “market map”. The market map illustrates the range of “positions” that a 
product can take in a market based on two dimensions that are important to the identified target 
market.  
Examples of those dimensions might be: 
• High price v low price 
• Basic quality v high quality 
• Low volume v high volume 
• Necessity v luxury 
• Light v heavy 
• Simple v complex 
• Lo-tech v high-tech 
• Young v old 
Let’s look at an illustrated example of a market map.  The map below shows one possible way in which 
the chocolate bar market could be mapped against two dimensions – quality and price and locates the 
products of the competition: 



===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 21  
How might a market map be used? 
One way a market map can be used is to identify where there are “gaps in the market,” in other words 
where there are customer needs that are not being met. For example, in the chocolate bar market, 
Divine Chocolate is a social enterprise which aims to provide better income for cocoa farmers in 
developing countries. It successfully spotted that some consumers were prepared to pay a premium 
price for very high quality chocolate made from Fairtrade cocoa and therefore developed a product to 
meet these specific customer needs. Equally, Green & Black’s exploited the opportunity to sell premium 
chocolate made from organic ingredients. Both these brands successfully moved into the high 
quality/high price quadrant of the market map, before too many competitors beat them to it. 
The trick with a market map is to ensure that market research confirms whether or not there is actually 
any demand for a possible “gap in the market”.  There may be very good reasons why consumers do not 
want to buy a product that might potentially fill a gap identified in the market map, for example who 
would want to pay a high price for a low quality product? 
The Competitive Environment 
Businesses will try to produce a good or service where they do not face much, if any, competition. 
However, in reality, all businesses will have some form of competition. This competition might be strong 
and direct, i.e. there are many businesses producing very similar products, or indirect i.e. competitors 
are producing goods or services that represent an alternative way for consumers to spend their money. 
If there is a little competition, this gives even a small business considerable market power.  
Competition 
When looking at competition in more detail, the first consideration is to determine what a market is.  
One definition of a market is that it is a place where similar goods and services are bought or sold. 
Similar would mean that buyers could make choices. This is not always a direct alternative, for example 
a choice between going to the cinema, going out for a meal or buying a new computer game. Markets 
are also not always physical places, as much of today’s business takes place through online transactions, 
where competitors’ products can be bought and sold. Some of the effects of direct, indirect and no 
competition on a business can be summarised as follows:   
Competition Description Impact on business decisions 
Direct: product Businesses have competitors that 
produce a very similar product.  
Businesses will try and make their products 
different, so they can charge more for them or 
gain customer loyalty. This may be through 
reviewing the quality of the product. A local café 
will aim for good customer service or a 
children’s play area, so that it is different from 
nearby national coffee shops. This will attract 
new and regular customers to their particular 
business. 
Direct: 
price 
Prices will be very similar if not 
identical. For example, petrol prices 
are normally very close to each 
other, despite the petrol station 
visited. 
Small businesses might decide to sell their 
products cheaper, but risk being in a price war. 
In this case, the bigger business with the most 
market power will tend to win, as they are more 
likely to be able to afford to lower their prices. 


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 22  
Competition Description Impact on business decisions 
Direct: location In a local area, a business may 
compete with other similar 
businesses. For products, this can 
be across a wide geographical area 
or even international depending on 
the costs of distribution.  
Small businesses may try and choose an area 
where they can target their products without 
competition, or where competitors target 
different market segments. A small local 
hairdresser may be able to work out an area 
where it can avoid competition from similar 
businesses. 
Indirect Consumers may choose a good or 
service that has similar 
characteristics (leisure, transport), 
but is not a direct competitor. 
Trains, buses and cars may all be 
ways of getting to work and 
therefore do compete with each 
other for customers, but indirectly. 
Some customers will be affected by changes to 
an indirect competitor; some customers will not 
change to, or from, the indirect competitor. For 
example, people may prefer to use a local 
independent cinema even though other leisure 
choices exist. 
None A business has no competition or its 
product is sufficiently different 
from any alternative. 
Small businesses can charge higher prices and 
make good profits, particularly if they are 
targeting a particular segment. Quality however, 
might suffer due to the lack of competition. This 
can make the business complacent, which can 
result in competitors being attracted to the 
market.  
 
The competitive environment is often out of the control of a business, but the decisions that it makes 
will be very much influenced by competitors and the threat of future competitors. New and small 
businesses face particular problems as they can be targeted by other businesses that would prefer to 
dominate profitable markets themselves. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 23
