1.3 - Putting a Business Idea Into Practice 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware how business implementation can be affected 
by the local and national business environment and how this might impact on a small business. Students 
must be aware of this sections relationship with the other areas in this theme and how again, this may 
impact on business decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
Business aims and 
objectives 
Defining business aims and business objectives 
Financial aims for a start-up business 
Non-financial aims for a start-up business 
Differences in business aims and objectives between firms 
Business revenues, costs 
and profits 
Understanding and calculating business revenue 
Understanding and calculating business costs 
Understanding and calculating business profit and loss 
Interest 
Break even concept and the margin of safety 
Interpreting break even diagrams 
Changes in break-even variables 
Cash and cash-flow The importance of cash in a business 
Cash versus profit 
Interpreting cash-flow forecasts 
Sources of business 
finance 
Short term finance options for small and start-up businesses 
Long-term finance options for small and start-up businesses 
 
Business aims and objectives 
What motivates someone to become an entrepreneur?   
For many people this will be money.  The chance to earn significant profits, buy a yacht, take numerous 
holidays, buy designer goods and send the kids to the best private schools. 
Money and personal wealth may well however, not be the real motivation. Evidence suggests that there 
are many more reasons why someone wants to start a business.  
Every business starts small.  However, if the entrepreneur takes some calculated risks, shows a lot of 
determination and has some luck, a start-up business can become very large, profitable and valuable. 
However, not every entrepreneur wants to build a big business and earn a fortune. 
The objectives when starting a business can be broadly split into two categories: financial objectives 
and non-financial objectives.  


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 24  
The purpose of business aims and objectives 
Aims and objectives provide a direction for any business. Without clear objectives, a business may 
provide goods and services that are not appropriate to why the business was set up. This may result in 
the business not being successful. Having objectives just written down however, is not enough to 
ensure business success. In order for objectives to be effective, they must be implemented and 
monitored over time. Some of the benefits to a business of having clear objectives are as follows:  
Reason  Explanation 
Direction 
 
Clear objectives will allow a business to decide on the direction it should take, 
for example, whether it should expand or not, whether it should change its 
target market or perhaps increase or decrease its range of goods or services. 
Focus for employees It is important that all employees are aware of the business’s objectives and 
that they are attempting to follow and meet them. If all employees are 
working together in the same direction, this will increase efficiency. 
Allows planning The overall firm’s strategy, what it plans to do in the future, will be in its 
business plan. Having clear objectives will allow consistent planning for the 
business as a whole and any departments within the business.  The plan will 
be designed so that the business objectives can be met. 
Measurement of 
success 
Having business objectives allows a business to measure its success. In other 
words, through a business reviewing its objectives, it would be able to see if it 
had achieved them or not or whether it was on the way to achieving them. 
This means that the business can then correct or change its business strategy 
if it is not working. A business might also need to change its business 
objectives if they are proving impossible to meet or if they are being achieved 
too easily.  
 
The ability to measure success is much easier to carry out for financial 
objectives, which are easily quantifiable, rather than non-financial objectives, 
such as “being more ethical” or “increasing customer satisfaction”, which are 
very difficult to measure. 
Financial objectives 
• Survival – over half of new businesses fail within five years and many new businesses do not 
survive much beyond their launch. Often entrepreneurs discover that their business idea was 
not as good as they originally thought and therefore the business cannot run profitably or it runs 
out of cash. Changes in the business environment also may make it harder for a business to be 
successful. The first priority of a business is therefore always to survive. 
• Profit – making profit is the main objective for most businesses. This is the reward to the 
entrepreneur for their hard work and the risks undertaken, often with their own money. Ideally, 
the profit earned is sufficient to provide the entrepreneur with enough income to live on. Profits 
may also be kept in the business to allow it to expand or develop further. Other objectives 
businesses may have which are linked to profit maximisation are increasing revenue, the 
amount made from sales, or decreasing costs. 
• Another financial objective is financial security or personal wealth. Working for someone else 
might mean the loss of a securely paid job, which means the entrepreneur would have no 


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 25  
financial security. Some entrepreneurs have a longer term objective.  They aim to build a 
valuable business that can substantially increase their future wealth. They could be aiming to 
build up the business and sell it, or make it so it will provide a substantial future income for 
them, with no risk to them of being made redundant! 
• Sales maximisation/market share – some businesses will be more concerned with increasing 
their sales and therefore their market share. They may accept lower profits in the short term, in 
order to increase sales.  
Non-financial objectives 
Although most businesses will be focussed on financial objectives, there are many other priorities that 
will exist for new and small businesses. Providing a high quality service will be particularly important for 
a new business. Looking after its customers and its employees would also be an objective for many 
small businesses.  
In many cases, non-financial objectives will link to or be consistent with financial objectives, but not 
always as sometimes even for a small business quality might conflict with profit. Therefore when 
businesses set and use objectives, they will prioritise the areas which are most important to their 
organisation and the owners. 
Here are some of the non-financial motives that are often quoted by entrepreneurs: 
• Social objectives such as benefiting the environment 
• More control over working life – want to choose what kind of work is done; the need for greater 
independence is a major motivator 
• A more flexible and convenient work schedule, including being able to work from or close to 
home; this motive is an important reason behind the many home-based business start-ups 
• Skills are being wasted and their potential is not being fulfilled 
• Escaping an uninteresting job or career 
• Pursuing an interest or hobby that they enjoy 
• Want to be the boss, as they are fed up with being told what to do 
• Want the feeling of personal satisfaction from building up a business 
• Fed up with working in a business hierarchy or a bureaucratic organisation, where there are lots 
of rules; people with entrepreneurial characteristics often feel stifled working with and for 
others! 
• Major change in personal circumstances for example redundancy, divorce, illness, bereavement 
 
Different aims and objectives 
Different businesses will have different aims and objectives. This is particularly the case with small 
businesses, where every entrepreneur is likely to have different motives for starting up their own 
business. For example: 
Entrepreneur 1: has recently been made redundant from a large building firm. He would like to turn his 
skills and experience into building maintenance in his local area. He wants varied work and enough 
money to live off, but does not want to build up the business or travel far. 
Entrepreneur 2: has a new business idea for a web application for finding places for a good night out. 
The idea is proving very popular in the local trials. The entrepreneur wants to develop this application 
and sell it all over the world in order to make a lot of profit.  


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 26  
Business objectives will also be affected by the external environment which firms operate within. A 
small low cost hairdresser may have direct competition in one area, indirect competition from an 
expensive hairdressing national brand in another area and no competition at all in a further area. The 
objectives of such a small business will be different because of the situation it finds itself in.   
 
Business revenues, costs and profits 
In order for a business to calculate its profit (or loss) it needs to work out its total costs and total 
revenue.  
Costs are the spending that a business has to undertake in order to make goods and provide services. 
Every business has costs, but they vary in terms of their type and amount. For a new business, 
estimating what the likely costs are going to be is often very difficult.  
Successful businesses place great importance on costs. In most cases they want to ensure they are kept 
as low as possible. There are many reasons for this including: 
• Increases in costs reduce the possible profits that the business can make 
• They are the main cause of cash-flow problems in a small business 
• They will change as the output or activity of a business changes 
Costs can be divided into two types: fixed and variable  
Fixed costs 
Fixed costs do not change as output varies.  In other words, they are fixed even if output moves up or 
down from period to period. 
Examples of fixed costs include: 
• Rent and council tax 
• Salaries 
• Marketing, for example advertising, market research 
• Insurance 
• Interest repayments 
• Leased equipment charges 
 
It is worth remembering that just because a cost is classified as “fixed”, it does not mean that the cost 
will stay the same forever. A fixed cost can change over time. For example, the rent of an office or 
shop may stay the same for 5 years.  However, the rent may change (up or down) when the rental 
agreement is renegotiated when due. The important point about a cost, like rent, being “fixed” is that it 
has to be paid, whatever the level of sales achieved. 
 
Fixed costs are particularly important when it comes to calculating the break even output of a business.  
The higher the level of fixed costs in a business, the higher the output needed to cover these costs and 
break even.  


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 27  
Variable costs 
Variable costs change when output changes. In other words the higher the output, the higher the 
variable costs.  
Variable costs tend to be those relating directly to the production or sale of a product.  Good examples 
include: 
• Raw materials and bought-in stocks and components 
• Wages based on hours worked or amount produced 
• Marketing costs based on sales  
• Agent and other commissions 
Total variable costs can be calculated by a simple formula:  
Variable cost per unit x output 
 
Total costs 
The total costs of a business can be calculated by simply adding together the variable costs, at different 
levels of output, to the firm’s fixed costs. The formula therefore is: 
Total costs (TC) = total fixed costs (TFC) + total variable costs (TVC) 
Example: 
Graham’s van repair business is a small business that has the following costs and sales output for 
March: 
Variable costs per job £75 
Garage rent and rates £500 
Salaries £1,500 
Advertising £100 
Other fixed costs £400 
Expected number of jobs for month 100 
To calculate the total costs for the business, start with the variable costs. These equal £75 per unit x 100 
jobs = £7,500 
Fixed costs = £500 (garage rent and rates) + £1,500 (salaries) + £100 (advertising) + £400 (other fixed 
costs) = £2,500 
Therefore the total costs for Graham’s business equal £7,500 (total variable costs) + £2,500 (total fixed 
costs) = £10,000  
As output increases the total costs will not increase as fast. This is because the fixed costs will stay the 
same. This means that a business may have lower average costs of production as it grows. 


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 28  
Revenue and Profit 
Revenue 
Revenue is the money the business receives from its sales. This can be represented simply using the 
formula: 
Revenue = selling price per unit x quantity sold 
 
In practice, most businesses sell more than one different product and have more than one selling price, 
which makes the calculation more complicated. However, the method remains the same. 
In the above example, if Graham charges £100 for each job that he completes, his revenue will equal: 
£100 (selling price per unit) x 100 (quantity sold) = £10,000. 
Is Graham’s business making a profit?  
Profit 
Having calculated the total costs and the total revenue for a business, it can now work out its profit. 
Profit is the financial return or reward that the owners of a business aim to achieve to reward them for 
the risk that they take. It will measure the success of that investment. 
Profit is also an important signal to other providers of finance to a business.  Banks, suppliers and other 
lenders are more likely to provide finance to a business that can demonstrate that it makes a profit, or is 
likely to do so in the near future, and that it can pay debts as they fall due. 
Profit is also an important source of finance for a business.  Profits earned, which are kept in the 
business and are not distributed to the owners via dividends or other payments, are known as retained 
profits. Retained profits are an important source of finance for any business, but especially start-up or 
small businesses.  The moment a product is sold for more than it cost to produce, then a profit is earned 
which can be reinvested 
Profit can be measured and calculated by the following formula:  
PROFIT = TOTAL REVENUE - TOTAL COSTS 
 
Here is an example which illustrates the formula in action: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 29  
 
Sales Costs Profit or loss? 
£100,000 £75,000 £25,000 profit 
£100,000 £125,000 (£25,000) loss  
Note: negative figures are shown in brackets 
 Total sales greater than total costs = PROFIT 
 Total sales less than total costs = LOSS 
➢ Total sales = total costs = BREAK EVEN 
 
Whatever the result, profit, loss or breaking even a business will always need to review its performance 
and look at how it might be improved. Can costs be decreased? How? And by when? Can revenue be 
increased? Should the price stay the same? Can more be sold? Is there a need for further investment to 
decrease costs or increase revenue? 
Interest  
As well as the costs involved in running a business, a business owner may also have to pay interest, if 
the business needed to borrow money in the form of a loan or mortgage when it was set up. The 
business may also arrange an overdraft with the bank, which will also involve the payment of interest. 
Interest will therefore form part of the firm’s total costs. The amount needed to be paid may vary if 
interest rates change. This is however, dependent on the terms of the loan/mortgage/overdraft, which 
would have been agreed with the bank and the business owner, when the specific source of finance was 
first taken out.  
The following formula can be used to calculate the interest rate on a loan as a percentage: 
 
Interest on loans (%) = total repayment – borrowed amount  x  100 
borrowed amount 
 
Example: 
If a new business start-up borrowed £50,000 but repaid £60,000 in total, the interest percentage would 
be:   £60,000 - £50,000   x   100 =   20% 
                 £50,000    
  


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 30  
Break even  
 
A business will calculate its break-even point in order for it to have an idea of how much it will need to 
produce to survive. Break-even is the point where total revenue is equal to total costs, which means the 
business is not making a profit or a loss. Through calculating break even, a business knows how many 
units it will need to produce and sell in order to start making a profit.  
This information can be represented on a break even diagram or graph and will show the potential 
profit or loss that could be made at different levels of output, as revenue and costs change.  
Break even diagram for Business A: 
This break even diagram shows that fixed costs are drawn as a straight line, which is the case because 
they do not change with output. The total cost line is also shown, instead of the variable cost line on its 
own, as the total cost line takes into account both fixed and variable costs. The total cost line starts at 
the same point as fixed costs, as even if the business is making no output, fixed costs still need to be 
paid. At zero output however, variable costs are zero resulting in fixed costs and total costs being the 
same value. The revenue line is lastly drawn, which starts at zero and goes up diagonally. This is because 
as the business makes and sells more, it will gain more revenue.  
In this example, Business A’s break-even point is 10,000 units, the point where total costs and total 
revenue cross. This means that if the business manages to produce and sell this amount of output, it will 
not be making a profit or a loss.   
Margin of safety 
Business A can also calculate the margin of safety from the break-even diagram. This is the difference 
between its current level of output/sales and the break-even point. If Business A was currently selling or 
producing 15,000 units, its margin of safety would be 15,000 (current level of output) – 10,000 (break-
even point) = 5,000 units. Business A would want the margin of safety to be as high as possible, as this 
shows how much output or sales could fall before it hits its break-even point and then after this, the 
business would be making a loss. 
Variable 
costs 
Margin of safety 
Break even point 


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 31  
A reminder of the formula for margin of safety is shown here: 
Margin of safety  = actual or budgeted sales – break even sales 
Calculating profit and loss from the break-even chart 
A business can determine the amount of predicted profit or loss level it expects to make at different 
levels of output from the break-even diagram. As already discussed, profit is calculated by deducting 
total costs from total revenue.  From reviewing the break-even diagram for Business B (on the next 
page)  it can be seen, at an output level of 80 units, the business is making £160 revenue and its total 
costs equate to £140. If we subtract the total costs from the total revenue the profit at this level of 
output equals:  £160 - £140 = £20.  
It is clear the business is making a profit at this level  of output, as the firm’s break-even point is 60 units 
(the point where total revenue = total costs) and as the business is operating at 80 units, a higher 
output level than the break-even point, then the business must be making a profit. 
However, if the business is operating below the break-even point of 60 units, the business will be 
making a loss. Looking again at the break even chart for Business B and assuming the business is 
producing 20 units, the value of total costs at this level of output is £80 and the total revenue figure is 
£40. Remember that profit = total revenue – total costs, so in this case, the business is making a loss as: 
£40 - £80 = (£40). 
This method of calculating profit/loss for a business can be applied to any level of output for a business 
that has produced a break even diagram. However, the difficulty is that sometimes values are difficult to 
read from the diagram and therefore if a business relied on this method only of calculating profit, 
inaccurate figures may be calculated and therefore used in decision making. For example, looking again 
at the break even chart for Business B, can the profit or loss be accurately worked out, purely from 
reading the graph, if the firm was operating at an output level of 55 units? 
Monthly break even chart for Business B: 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs / Revenues £
Number of Units 
Fixed costs Total Costs Sales Revenue
Break even 
point


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 32  
 
The impact of changes in revenue and costs on the break-even point 
As well as calculating profit and loss and identifying the break-even point, the break-even diagram can 
also be used to help business owners with decision making and “what if” scenarios. By changing one or 
more variables in the break-even diagram, business owners, or business decision-makers, can then 
assess the impact of this change on the break-even point. This will allow worst and best case situations 
to be prepared for by the business. Some examples are included here to illustrate this further. 
Example 1: Break even diagram to show the impact on the break-even point of an increase in selling 
price 
 
 
In the above situation, a business’s selling price has increased from £2 to £3. This has resulted in the 
amount needed to be sold to break even (the break-even output) decreasing from 60 units to 30 units. 
In this case, the business may then conduct some research to see if customers would be willing to pay 
the increased selling price or whether demand would drop significantly, as even though the break point 
has lowered, in this case it would take the business a significantly longer time to reach this point due to 
a drop in demand. 
  
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs/revenue £s
Number of units
Revenue (1) Revenue (2) Fixed costs Total costs
New break
even point
Original break 
even point


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 33  
Example 2: Break even diagram to show the impact on the break-even point of an increase in fixed 
costs 
 
In this case, the fixed costs of the business have increased from £60 to £70. This has increased the total 
costs which has resulted in the amount needed to be sold to break even (the break-even output) 
increasing from 60 units to 70 units. In the case, if the business anticipates that its fixed costs are going 
to rise, which would ultimately make it harder to break even and therefore become profitable, it may 
look for different ways to become more efficient to lower costs, to overcome this change. 
Calculating break even using the formula 
Rather than drawing a break even diagram to calculate the break-even point each time, a quicker and 
more efficient method of calculating break-even is to use the formulae. The break-even formulae are 
shown in the box: 
 
                 Break even output =           fixed cost 
(sales price – variable cost) 
This will give you the number of units the business needs to produce and sell to break even 
 
                 Break-even point in costs/revenue = break-even point in units x sales price 
This formula can be used to calculate the revenue (or costs!) at the breakeven level of output 
 
 
Break even output using the formula 
In order to calculate the break-even output using the formula, three variables are required. These are 
fixed costs, sales price and variable cost per unit. 
In example 2, the original fixed costs of the business were £60.  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs/revenue £s
Number of units
Revenue Fixed costs (1) Fixed costs (2) Total costs (1) Total costs (2)
New break
even pointOriginal break 
even point


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 34  
The current variable cost per unit is £1. Variable costs are not drawn directly onto the break-even chart. 
However, this value can still be calculated if total costs and fixed costs are known and the formula here 
is used: 
Total variable costs = total costs – total fixed costs 
 
From reviewing the chart, at an easy to read point, i.e. 10 units, the original total costs were £70 and 
the original total fixed costs were £60. Total variable costs at this level of output therefore = £70 - £60 = 
£10. 
To calculate the variable cost per unit, the number of units just needs to be divided into this amount = 
£10/10 = £1. 
In order to calculate the sales price or the selling price per unit, a similar method can be applied. At an 
easy to read point i.e. 10 units, the total sales revenue = £20. To calculate the sales price or selling price 
per unit, the number of units just needs to be divided into this amount = £20/10 = £2. 
We now have all the variables required to calculate the break-even output level using the formula as 
shown: 
Break even output =           fixed cost  =      £60    = 60 units 
(sales price – variable cost)  £2 - £1 
This being the same answer as obtained from the break-even chart. 
           
Break-even point in costs/revenue using the formula 
We will use example 2 again to illustrate how to calculate the break-even point in costs/revenue. A 
reminder of the formula is: 
 
 
Break-even point in costs/revenue = break-even point in units x sales price 
 
 
The original break-even point in units = 60 units x £2 (sales price) = £120. This again shows the same 
value on the “y” axis for costs/revenue in £s as the break-even diagram, at the break-even point. 
The benefit of using break even analysis to a business 
 
 Break-even is a very useful business tool, as it can quickly illustrate what happens to a firm’s 
profits at different output levels. This can help a business with decision-making about cost levels 
and selling prices.  


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 35  
 A business could create a series of break-even diagrams to illustrate the impact on the break-
even point if one of the variables on the graph changed. This is called “what if” analysis. 
Break even does however have limitations: 
 It assumes that the average price that goods sell at will stay the same.  
 It gives the impression that just because products are produced that they will be sold at the 
average price.  
 It can become very complicated to a business which sells many different products. 
 It assumes that variable costs are proportional to output, whereas they may get cheaper as 
output rises or more expensive if workers have to be paid overtime.  
 It may mean that the business focuses on breaking even rather than making a profit! 
Cash and cash-flow 
Cash-flow describes the movement of cash into and out of a business. It is not the same as profit. Many 
profitable businesses fail because they do not have enough cash to pay their bills. This is because profit 
is recorded straight after a sale, whereas cash is recorded when it is either spent or received by the 
business. If a business offers trade credit to a customer for example, of 30 days, then the sale and 
therefore profit is documented when the goods are taken by the customer, but the cash will not be 
recorded until payment i.e. the cash is received 30 days later! 
In business, cash is always on the move… 
• Cash-flows into the bank account when customers pay for their sales, when a loan is received 
from the bank, interest is received or when assets are sold 
• Cash-flows out of the bank account when suppliers are paid, employee wages and salaries are 
paid, interest is paid to the bank and so on… 
You need to be able to distinguish between: 
• Cash inflows: movements of cash into a business 
• Cash outflows: movements of cash out of the business 
The difference between the cash inflows and cash outflows during a specific period, for example a 
week or a month is known as the “net cash-flow”. 
Net cash-flow = cash inflows  – cash outflows for a given time period 
The challenge for any business, particularly new businesses, is to manage its net cash-flow successfully, 
so that the business does not run out of money. 
Main types of cash inflow and outflow 
The main types of cash-flow can be summarised as follows: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 36  
 
Cash inflows Cash outflows 
Cash sales Payment of overheads, wages and salaries 
Receipts from trade customers Payment of suppliers, for example raw materials, inventories 
Sale of spare assets Buying equipment 
Investment of share capital Interest on bank loan or overdraft 
Personal funds invested Payment of dividends 
Receipt of bank loan Repayment of loans 
Government grants Income tax, VAT and corporation tax 
 
Why businesses suffer cash-flow problems 
Start-up and small businesses are especially vulnerable to cash-flow problems. The reasons for this can 
be divided into two types: 
• not enough money coming into the business fast enough  
• too much money going out of the business too quickly 
In addition, if a business does have cash-flow problems then new businesses or businesses facing 
financial difficulties will often not have reserves of retained profits to see them through until things 
improve. If a business runs out of cash and is not able to obtain new finance, it will become insolvent. 
If a business has a positive cash-flow it will build up cash reserves. This can be saved in case of future 
problems or used for future investment. 
The cash-flow forecast 
The cash-flow forecast predicts the net cash-flows of the business over a future period. It can be used to 
identify likely cash-flow problems and help avoid or solve them. 
The forecast estimates what the cash inflows into the bank account and outflows out of the bank 
account will be.   The result of the cash-flow forecast is also an estimate of the bank balance at the end 
of each period covered (normally this is for each month). An example of a simple cash-flow forecast is 
shown below: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 37  
 
£'000  January February March April May June 
Cash inflows  200 250 200 150 100 250 
Cash outflows  250 300 300 100 250 150 
Net cash-flow  
(cash inflows – cash outflows) 
(50) (50) (100) 50 (150) 100 
Opening balance 
(same figure as the closing 
balance for the previous month) 
250 200 150 50 100 (50) 
Closing balance 
(net cash-flow + opening balance) 
200 150 50 100 (50) 50 
As can be seen from the table, the closing balance becomes the opening balance for the next month. 
This is then added to the net cash-flow for that month, which may be a positive (April) or negative 
(May), in order to calculate the closing balance for that month. The closing balance each month might 
be a surplus, which means the business has a positive cash balance at the end of the month, or a deficit, 
which means that the business has a negative cash balance at the end of the month (often indicated by 
brackets, as in May).  
Looking at this cash-flow forecast a little more carefully, it shows that the business will start the period, 
i.e. January, with a cash surplus or opening balance of £250,000. During the first three months, the net 
cash-flow is negative, as it is predicted that there will be more cash outflows than inflows, which will 
reduce the closing balance surplus to £50,000 in March. In April and June, the cash outflows are 
estimated to reduce considerably making them less than the cash inflows, resulting in a surplus in the 
closing balance in those two months.  In May again, the outflows are predicted to be higher than the 
cash inflows. The opening balance, of £100, is not enough to cover this increase and therefore the 
business is forecasted to go into a deficit of £50,000. 
Businesses must carefully monitor when the business is forecast to experience a deficit, as this 
highlights the business may run out of cash! 
To recap the key formulae for cash-flow forecasts are: 
Net cash-flow = cash inflows – cash outflows in a given period 
Opening balance = closing balance of the previous period 
Closing balance = opening balance + net cash-flow 
Why the cash-flow forecast is so important 
A business uses a cash-flow forecast to: 
• Identify potential shortfalls in cash balances in advance – think of the cash-flow forecast as an 
“early warning system”.  This is the most important reason for a cash-flow forecast and enables 
the business to take action, so that it does not experience any cash-flow issues, which can 
ultimately prevent the business from trading and becoming insolvent 


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 38  
• Makes sure that the business can afford to pay suppliers and employees - suppliers which do 
not get paid will soon stop supplying the business; it is even worse if employees are not paid on 
time, as in this case there would be no-one to either produce the goods or provide customers 
with the level of service that they demand 
• Spot problems with customer payments – preparing the forecast encourages the business to 
look at how quickly customers are paying their debts. This is only an issue in some businesses 
and not all. For example, most retailers take most of their sales in cash/credit cards at the point 
of sale i.e. at the time of purchase 
• Compare actual figures to forecast figures – this allows management to spot if there are any 
potential issues and take appropriate action, for example if there are significant differences 
between the forecasted figures and the actual figures, a business owner would need to arrange 
appropriate sources of finance to cover any shortfalls in cash 
• External stakeholders, such as banks, may require a regular forecast - certainly if the business 
has a bank loan, the bank will want to look at the business cash-flow compared to its forecast at 
regular intervals, to ensure that the business will continue to make its repayments  
 
Main causes of cash-flow problems 
A cash-flow problem arises when a business struggles to pay its debts as they become due. When cash-
flow is consistently negative and the business uses up its cash balances, then the problem becomes 
serious. The main causes of cash-flow problems are: 
Factor Why it causes a cash-flow problem… 
Low profits or 
(worse) losses 
There is a direct link between low profits or losses and cash-flow problems. 
Remember, most loss-making businesses eventually run out of cash 
Over-investment 
in capacity 
This happens when a business spends too much on machinery, equipment or 
premises. Factory equipment, which is not being used, does not generate revenue, 
so is often a waste of cash 
Too much stock Holding too much inventory or stock ties up cash and there is an increased risk that 
these inventories become obsolete i.e. cannot be sold and therefore cannot 
generate any cash inflows 
Allowing 
customers too 
much credit 
Offering credit to customers, i.e. buy now and pay later, is a good way to build 
customer loyalty and long-term revenue, but late payment is a common problem 
and slow-paying customers put a strain on cash-flow 
Overtrading This occurs where a business expands too quickly, putting pressure on short-term 
finance.  For example, a retail chain might try to open too many stores too quickly, 
before each starts to generate profits  
Seasonal demand Predictable changes in seasonal demand create cash-flow problems, but because 
they are expected, a business should be able to handle these in an appropriate way 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 39  
Sources of business finance 
A start-up or existing small business will need finance. They will need it for various reasons, short term 
and long term. There are different sources of finance available and the actual source chosen by a 
business will depend on the amount and reason the finance is required, as well as the circumstances 
and the type of legal status the business has. 
The challenge of raising money 
Often the hardest part of starting a business is raising the money to get going.  
An entrepreneur might have a great business idea and clear plan for how to exploit a market 
opportunity.  However, unless sufficient finance can be raised, the entrepreneur will struggle to make 
the most of the opportunity. 
Raising finance for a start-up requires careful planning.  The entrepreneur needs to decide: 
• How much finance is required? Raising finance is hard work and expensive – a start-up business 
should avoid having to go through the process too often! 
• When and for how long the finance is needed?  A useful distinction can be made between long-
term and short-term finance 
• What security (if any) can be provided? This will affect the ability of the business to raise a bank 
or other loan where the lender requires some security (or “collateral”) 
• Whether the entrepreneur is prepared to give up some control (ownership) of the start-up in 
return for investment 
• Whether the cost of the finance, for example the interest charged, is justified 
The finance needs of a start-up should also take account of these key areas: 
• Set-up costs: the costs that are incurred before the business starts to trade 
• Getting ready to produce: the fixed or long term assets that the business needs before it can 
begin to trade, such as machinery, equipment, vehicles etc 
• Working capital: money required for the day to day operation of the business. Money will be 
needed by the business to buy the stocks required by the business, such as raw materials, and 
allowance should be made for amounts that will be owed by customers once sales begin, if the 
business chooses to offer its customers trade credit 
• Growth and development: in the future the business may wish to grow and expand and 
therefore will need to invest in extra capacity, for example in extra space to produce more 
products  
Finance to cover different periods 
An important consideration when obtaining finance for a business is when and for how long the finance 
is needed.   A useful distinction can be made between long-term and short-term sources of finance.  The 
table summarises the main examples and uses of each category: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 40  
 
Long-term Short-term 
Finances the whole business over many years Finances day-to-day trading of the business; 
repayable usually within a year 
Examples: Examples: 
 Personal savings 
 Retained profits 
 Share capital 
 Venture capital 
 Bank loans 
 Crowd funding 
 Bank overdraft 
 Trade credit 
 
 
Short-term sources of business finance: 
Trade credit  
This is used by many businesses as a short-term source of finance. Trade credit essentially means that a 
firm’s suppliers will allow it to have the goods and pay for them at a later date.  
 This can give time for the business to use the goods and sell its products before it pays the 
suppliers, which will improve its cash-flow position.  
 If the bills are not paid on time however, this can lead to the business getting a bad reputation 
and losing future credit arrangements with the supplier.  
 It can also be particularly difficult for new start-up businesses to negotiate trade credit with 
suppliers, as there is a risk that the business will fail and suppliers may end up not getting paid! 
Bank overdraft 
Businesses of all sizes use bank overdrafts as a means of finance.  As a business gets bigger, it often 
finds that its overdraft facility also needs to grow.  That is because an overdraft is essentially a short-
term source of finance that is available to help fund the day-to-day payments required by a business. It 
allows the business to withdraw funds from its account that are not there, up to an agreed maximum 
limit, and is only used when the business requires additional, temporary amounts of money. 
 The big advantage of a bank overdraft is its flexibility. If a business experiences a short-term 
shortage of cash or an unexpected cost, then it can be paid by using some of the overdraft 
facility.  Interest is only paid on the amount used. 
 The main downside of an overdraft is that it is repayable to the bank at any time. A business may 
have an overdraft facility of £100,000 i.e. it can owe the bank up to that amount, but the bank 
may lower or even withdraw that facility at any time.  This happened to numerous businesses 
with bank overdrafts during the credit crunch of 2007-8, many of whom were relying on their 
overdraft to stay in business.  
 The other drawback of an overdraft is that they usually have high levels of interest attached to 
them, making them an expensive form of finance when they are used.  
 


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 41  
Long-term sources of business finance: 
Personal savings 
An entrepreneur will often invest personal cash balances into a start-up. This can be personal savings 
from the bank or building society.  This can also be in the form of providing assets for the business, for 
example using an own car, or it can be as simple as working for nothing! By using this source of finance, 
the entrepreneur is providing a strong signal, to other potential investors and the bank, of his/her 
commitment to the business venture.   
 This is a cheap form of finance that is readily available.  
 Investing personal savings maximises the control the entrepreneur keeps over the business.   
 The amount that is available may be limited, resulting in this being used with other sources of 
finance to fund the business. 
Loans  
These might be from friends and family or from financial institutions, such as a bank.  
Friends and family: 
Friends and family who are supportive of the business idea may be willing to provide money either 
directly to the entrepreneur or into the business.   
 This can be quick and cheap to arrange (certainly compared with a bank loan).  
 The interest and repayment terms may be more flexible than a bank loan.   
 However, borrowing in this way can add to the stress faced by an entrepreneur, particularly if 
the business gets into difficulties, as it can cause disagreements. 
 The amount available may be limited, resulting in this being combined with other sources of 
finance. 
Bank loan: 
A bank loan is an amount of money borrowed for a set period with an agreed repayment schedule. The 
repayment amount will depend on the size and duration of the loan and the rate of interest.  This is a 
common source of finance that a small or new business would choose. However, bank loans tend to be 
more readily available for well-established and growing businesses, rather than start-up businesses.  
The reason for this is risk – banks prefer to loan to successful businesses, which makes them more likely 
to be able to repay the loan and interest. 
If a bank loan can be obtained then there are several advantages for a start-up or an established small 
business: 
 The business is guaranteed the money for a certain period - generally three to ten years (unless 
it breaks the loan conditions). 
 Loans can be matched to the lifetime of the equipment or other assets the loan is being used for 
 While interest must be paid on the loan, there is no need to provide the bank with a share in the 
business, so no control is lost. 
 Interest rates may be fixed for the term, making it easier to forecast interest payments and 
cash-flow. 
 Repayments are made in instalments, resulting in the business having access to substantial 
amounts of cash that does not need to be paid back all in one-go.  
There are also some disadvantages of a bank loan: 


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 42  
 Time consuming - a new business would need to produce a detailed business plan to show to 
the bank in order to secure the loan, which would take up time and resource; however it could 
be argued in the long-run, that this careful planning would help the business to have a greater 
chance of success in the future. 
 Security - normally has to be given to the bank on some of the assets of the business.  The bank 
will have control over these assets if the business fails. 
 Lack of flexibility - a small business might take a loan out for £50,000 but finds it only needed 
£30,000.  That means that interest is being paid on £20,000 of loan that it does not need. 
 Interest – interest must be paid on the loan amount, which increases the costs of the business. 
Venture capital 
Venture capitalists often invest in small businesses.  Venture capital can be gained from professional 
investors or companies who typically invest between £10,000 to £750,000.   
Venture capitalists tend to have made their money by setting up and selling their own business – in 
other words they have proven entrepreneurial expertise. The advantages and disadvantage of this 
source of finance are: 
 Venture capitalists often make their own skills, experience and contacts available to the firm. 
 They have access to large amounts of funds. 
 The venture capital company or investor will usually want a share of the business and of the 
profits, which can result in some loss of control over the firm for the entrepreneur, which he/she 
may not want to give up. 
Obtaining venture capital is quite different from raising debt or a loan from a lender, such as a bank. 
Lenders have a legal right to interest on a loan and repayment of the capital, irrespective of the success 
or failure of the business. By contrast, venture capital is often invested in exchange for a stake in the 
company where the return will be dependent on the growth and profitability of the business. 
Not every business is suitable for investment by a venture capitalist.  Such investors prefer to invest in 
small entrepreneurial businesses which are aiming (and have the potential) for sales and profit growth. 
As a rough guide unless a business can offer the prospect of significant turnover growth within five 
years, it is unlikely to be of interest to a venture capital firm. 
Share capital 
Small or new businesses that are set up as a private limited company can raise finance by selling shares 
in the company.  There are many advantages to a business of raising finance through share issues: 
 Large sums of money can be raised. 
 Capital does not have to be repaid. 
 There is no interest – dividend payments can be missed if profits are low. 
There are however some disadvantages including: 
 Possible loss of control if the original owners sell more than 50% of the total shares. 
 Need to satisfy shareholders expectations of dividends and share price growth. 
Retained profit 
This is a very important source of finance for an existing small business, but is clearly not suitable for a 
new business, as they are yet to build up reserves of profit! 


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 43  
The idea is simple.  When a business has worked out its profits, the owners or shareholders can decide 
whether to take the profits for themselves or reinvest the profits back into in the business.   
Retained profits have several major advantages: 
 They are cheap, as no interest has to be paid on them. 
 They are very flexible – the business owners have complete control over how they are 
reinvested and what proportion is kept, rather than paid as dividends. 
 They do not dilute or reduce the ownership of the organisation, so for companies there is no 
increased risk of a takeover. 
There are, however, also some disadvantages: 
 If a business needs some temporary finance because it is facing difficulties, then it is unlikely to 
have any profits that it can use. 
 Growth may be slow if it is dependent on retained profits, as profits may not be high enough to 
finance the growth quickly. 
Crowdfunding 
Crowdfunding is a recent way of small businesses or projects raising money from outside investors, 
often through the internet or a crowd funding platform such as www.kickstarter.com or 
www.crowdfunder.co.uk  
A proposal is publicised and the aim is that a large number of small investors will be attracted from all 
over the world. The investors will generally be in sympathy with the aims of the project or the cause for 
which the funds are being raised. 
There are some advantages to a business of using crowdfunding to secure finance: 
 It provides cheap investment when other sources of external finance may not be available. 
 If the project is interesting or newsworthy it might attract good publicity, which will help the 
business in becoming successful. 
 The business may create a web blog or use social media to keep investors informed, which might 
provide ongoing finance. 
 Investors may have experience or skills that they can offer the business. 
There will however be drawbacks: 
 Investors will need to be offered a return; this might be free use of the good or service 
produced, or a share in the profits. Some schemes will also provide shares, which therefore 
dilutes the control of the original owners of the business.  
 There is a risk that there will be a limit to the amount of money investors are willing to use in 
this way. 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 44
