1.5 - Understanding External Influences on a Business 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware how the local and national business 
environment might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this topic’s relationship with 
the other topics in this theme and how this might affect decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
Business stakeholders Main business stakeholders and their objectives 
How stakeholders impact and are impacted by business activity 
Stakeholder conflict 
Technology and business Different types of technology that businesses use 
How technology influences business activity 
Legislation and business Purposes and principles of consumer legislation 
Purposes and principles of employee legislation 
Impact on businesses of meeting and not meeting legislation 
requirements 
The economy and business How businesses are affected by the economy and changes to key 
economic variables  
External influences How businesses are subject to external change and how it influences 
their business activity 
 
Business stakeholders 
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest in the activities and decision-making of a business.  
Stakeholders include: 
• Shareholders or business owners 
• Managers and employees 
• Customers 
• Suppliers 
• Banks and other finance providers 
• Government 
• Local community 
• Competitors 
• Pressure Groups 
Various factors affect how many stakeholders a business has and the strength of their interest and 
influence on the business. These factors include: 
The size and scale of the business: for example, a small, sole-trader service business will have relatively 
few stakeholders.  Contrast this with a much larger, complex business like a national supermarket chain, 


===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 55  
which has thousands of employees operating in numerous locations and is an important customer to 
hundreds of suppliers. 
The nature of the good or service:  some products are more likely to attract the attention of 
stakeholders. For example, a manufacturing business that has high levels of carbon emissions or waste 
packaging will be scrutinised much more closely than a simple service business.  The local community 
will have a greater interest in a business that is a major local employer than in a one-man band. 
Objectives of business stakeholders 
The main objectives of each main stakeholder group will not always be the same as the objectives the 
business sets for itself. The objectives of the more important stakeholders to a business can be 
summarised as follows: 
Stakeholder Mainly interested in… 
Shareholders/owners • Good return on their investment 
• High level of profits and dividends 
• Success and growth of the business 
• Proper running of the business (if shareholders are not directly involved 
in the day-to-day running of the company) 
Managers and 
employees 
• Rewards, including maximising basic pay and other financial incentives 
• Job security and good working conditions  
• Promotion opportunities 
• Job satisfaction and status through high levels of motivation, interesting 
roles and responsibilities 
• Success of the business 
Customers • Value for money 
• Product quality that meets their specific needs 
• Appropriate levels of customer service 
Suppliers • Fair or high prices and prompt payments 
• Continued profitable trade with the business 
• Financial stability – can customers pay their bills? 
Banks and other 
finance providers 
• Profitability and cash-flow for the bank 
• Low risk that the business will not be able to repay finance provided  
• Growth in profits and value of the business  
Government • Prompt and correct collection and payment of taxes, for example VAT, 
income tax 
• Creating jobs, for example through businesses succeeding and growing 
• Compliance with business legislation, for example health and safety, 
minimum wage/national living wage compliance, consumer protection, 
fair trading, environmental protection 
Local community • Success of the business – particularly creating and retaining jobs 
• Compliance with local laws and regulations, for example noise, pollution 
Competitors • Profitability and success for their own business 


===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 56  
Stakeholder Mainly interested in… 
• An increase in market share 
Pressure Groups • These could include trade unions and environmental groups 
• Best deal for their members, for example trade unions will push for 
higher wages, environmental groups will want safeguards to prevent 
business activity damaging the environment 
How stakeholders are affected by business activity 
Any activity of a business will affect some, if not all of its stakeholders. The impact will differ dependent 
on the particular stakeholder group. In many cases, the impact will be positive for some stakeholders 
and negative for others.  
Example: If a business decides to relocate to a location that will be more convenient for customers, this 
will have different effects on different groups of stakeholders. Customers will benefit, the owners will 
also benefit, as the profits are likely to increase. Employees might lose their jobs or be forced to 
relocate, so the effect on them will be negative and one local community will lose, whilst the other local 
community gains in terms of job and therefore wealth creation.  
It should be noted that the effect on stakeholders might be different in the short term and long term. A 
decrease in wages for workers might be negative in the short term, but might ensure that the business 
remains competitive and survives, which will mean that the workers’ jobs will be preserved in the long 
term. 
Impact of stakeholders on business activity 
The behaviour of stakeholders will be influenced by their objectives, as previously described, and in 
turn, this will impact on the activities of the business. 
Example: Employees want higher pay. This means they will negotiate with the managers to get a better 
deal, possibly threatening strike action if they do not get a pay rise. If they are successful, then this will 
increase the costs of the business. This may result in the business having to increase its prices to 
maintain its profit level. However, this might not be possible if there are competitors, so the profits 
earned by the owners or shareholders will decrease, as prices will need to stay the same in order for the 
business to remain competitive. 
All stakeholders can impact business activity. If suppliers insist on immediate payment, this will make 
the business’s cash-flow more difficult to manage. If the owners want short-term profits, they may 
prefer a high price strategy rather than a low price, high growth option.  
Why might the objectives of stakeholders be in conflict? 
Many business objectives are shared by a broad range of stakeholders. 
For example, an objective for a business start-up of achieving survival would be supported by nearly all 
the stakeholders.  Other than its competitors, it is unlikely to be in anyone’s interest for a business to 
fail. 
However, once a business becomes better established and larger, then potential conflicts begin to arise. 
Let’s look at two examples in a little detail: 
Business expansion versus higher short-term profit: 


===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 57  
An objective of increasing the size and scale of a business might be supported by managers, employees, 
suppliers and the local community – largely for the extra jobs and sales that expansion would bring.   
However, an expansion is often associated with increased costs in the short-term, for example extra 
marketing spending, new locations opened, more production capacity added.  This might result in lower 
overall profits in the short-term, which may cause conflict with the business shareholders or owners, 
who may want high profits and high rewards for being a shareholder in the form of dividend payments 
now and therefore would not be prepared to wait for rewards.  
However in the longer-term, most business owners will be in support of expansion, particularly if it 
increases the overall value of the business. 
Job losses versus keeping jobs 
This was a big issue for many businesses during the recent economic downturn.  In order to reduce 
costs and not spend cash, business managers made some staff redundant or introduced other measures 
like short-time working to reduce wage costs.  This will have been supported by business owners and 
managers.   
However, it created a potential conflict with stakeholders such as employees (who were directly 
affected), the local community (affected by local job losses) and suppliers (which suffered from a 
reduction in business). 
Here are some other potential causes of conflicts between stakeholders: 
• “Short-term” thinking by managers who want to maximise profits today, may discourage 
important long-term investment in the business which would increase owners profits in the long 
run 
• Investing in new machinery to achieve better efficiency to raise profits for the owners, may 
result in job losses 
• Extending products into mass markets to increase sales and profits for shareholders  may result 
in lower quality standards for consumers 
 
Technology and business 
In recent years there has been a revolution in how businesses can benefit from new technology. The 
invention and widespread use of computers and mobile phones has allowed massive changes to the 
way businesses operate and how they communicate. It has also redefined markets for many businesses 
and how they conduct their buying and selling operations. Digital technology is an overall term used to 
include all aspects of computer use and can be applied to most areas of human life from its use in 
education and health, to its use by government and business. 
E-commerce 
Businesses have been using computers for over thirty years. Originally computers were used mainly for 
the storage of data and the production of documents, but as technology has developed, the amount of 
uses for information and communication technology (ICT) has increased to include stock control and 
production technologies, such as computer aided design (CAD) and computer aided manufacturing 
(CAM). 


===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 58  
The revolution in the use of computers has taken place since the invention of the worldwide web, which 
has allowed computers to be linked both nationally and internationally. Combined with the use and 
availability of mobile phones and smart phones, this has created a new digital world where businesses, 
customers and employees can all benefit from cheap and affordable technologies. 
In the last twenty years, the buying and selling of goods through e-commerce has grown rapidly. This 
has included auction sites and internet retailers, as well as high street retailers developing internet sites. 
There have been many benefits of e-commerce to its users, but one of the most important is it allows 
access to wider markets. 
The table highlights the advantages and disadvantages of e-commerce. 
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Businesses  Can sell products and services 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week 
 Costs can be reduced, as no need for 
retail premises 
 Market can be expanded on a national 
and international basis 
 Quality will be improved, as 
businesses will be under constant 
scrutiny, as customers can easily 
compare one business’s products to 
another through reviewing online 
feedback; only the best value for 
money goods and services will be 
chosen resulting in an increase in 
efficiency 
 Processing of orders is fast and 
delivery can be quick and in line with 
customer expectations; delivery can 
also be tracked 
 Data recording and analysis is easily 
achieved; can help with targeted 
promotional activity 
 Pure play or e-tailers can locate in less 
expensive areas of the country, where 
land is not of a premium price 
 No personal contact with 
customers, so more difficult to 
influence sales on an individual 
basis  
 ICT systems have to be 
established, maintained and 
updated which can add to costs 
and lead to customer 
frustration if unreliable 
 Distribution costs can increase 
rapidly through increased 
geographical spread of sales 
 Increased competition, as 
businesses can make products 
available on an international 
basis 
 Not all customers have internet 
access; some customers are 
afraid of fraud and therefore 
will not trade electronically 
 Providing a good customer 
service, including return of 
products purchased, can be 
expensive 
 
Customers  Allows customers to shop from the 
comfort of their own home at a time 
when it is convenient 
 Cheaper prices and better quality due 
to competition 
 Availability can be checked, which 
means no wasted journeys to shops 
 Choice is increased, as products can be 
selected from anywhere in the world 
 Product details and reviews are 
 Customers cannot see or try 
goods before purchasing them; 
returning goods can be 
inconvenient or expensive 
 Possibility of personal details 
being used for fraud or for 
unwanted advertising 
 Delays in delivery compared to 
high street shopping, where 
goods are available immediately 


===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 59  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
available, including from other 
customers 
 No hard sell from employees; 
customers are free to choose and buy 
products that best suit them 
 
 Potential customers, with no 
internet access, may lose out on 
choice 
Communities 
 
 Growth of new job opportunities in 
providing e-sales centres, distribution 
outlets and transport networks 
 Increased sales in associated 
industries, such as technology and 
communication 
 Local and national economic benefits 
from businesses who are successful; 
individuals with higher disposable 
incomes, due to now being in 
employment, will spend this income in 
other businesses, creating a multiplier 
effect  
 Loss of traditional retailers from 
high street shopping areas and 
retail parks, due to an increase 
in competition  
 Increase in products from other 
countries that have cheaper 
costs, resulting in the loss of 
direct and indirect jobs from an 
economy 
 
Social media 
Most businesses will now either be using, or at least be aware of, Twitter and Facebook. Social media 
provides an unrivalled number of direct contacts for communication – said to be 2 to 3 billion potential 
customers worldwide. It is also not expensive to set up and to operate at a basic level. Most social 
media sites allow data collection of users. 
Marketing and promotion in particular, can be considerably expanded through the use of social media, 
although small and new businesses may find it hard to establish a following just using a Facebook page. 
There are an enormous number of similar businesses using similar methods. Social media is often linked 
to the business website, but provides a more up to date “newsy” type of information or blogs. 
Other areas of the business can also benefit, for example the business may well link some recruitment 
strategies to social media options and sites such as LinkedIn can provide a CV sharing platform. 
Digital communication 
Digital communication is now in widespread use throughout the world. This includes all devices such as 
mobile phones, tablets, fax machines and video conferencing equipment. It has enormous applications. 
Digital communication can also happen through social media platforms. 
The use of digital communication and digital technology can be applied to all stakeholders. Some 
specific examples are as follows: 
• Customers – ordering, invoicing or sending bills, customer service, advertising 
• Suppliers – ordering, payments, product information 
• Employees – payslips, job information, booking holidays, checking hours to be worked 


===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 60  
• Shareholders – annual reports, dividend information and payments 
In addition, e-mail could be used for communication to all stakeholders, to share relevant information 
that is appropriate to the individual stakeholder needs. 
Specific advantages and disadvantages of using digital communication to a business are listed in the 
table: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Cheap to operate and widely used. 
Messages and data can be transmitted 
quickly and is increasingly possible 
throughout the world 
 May be unreliable and no guarantee that 
messages will be received or accessed by 
the person intended to receive them 
 Data and messages can be stored 
electronically, so saves cost of storage. Can 
be saved digitally and backed up using 
cloud storage 
 Can lead to communication overload, as 
more messages are created and more 
information is received and sent. Important 
messages and emails may be lost or 
delayed 
 Possible to produce translated versions 
using online applications  
 Equipment may not work and not all places 
will be connected 
 Teleconferencing and videoconferencing 
are possible, which can produce 
considerable time and cost savings 
 Environmental and health concerns over 
electronic transmission 
 High quality advertising and marketing 
messages are possible through high 
definition graphic and video images 
 Lack of leisure time, as employees 
expected to be available longer hours and 
when on holiday 
  Constant training requirement for staff to 
understand how to use digital 
communication efficiently 
Payment systems 
Technology has been used by businesses for a long time. The paying of staff directly into their individual 
bank accounts has been used well before the internet was developed. The use of the internet has 
accelerated the use of e-payments, to such an extent that in many countries it has overtaken the use of 
cash within the country. This does however, vary considerably between different countries.  
One of the first uses of internet payment systems was for businesses to pay suppliers through direct 
banking payments, either on a one off or regular basis. Similarly businesses can collect payments from 
customers in a similar way. Methods such as standing orders, direct debits, debit cards and credit cards, 
now represent the “normal” way for many businesses to collect payments from customers, with 
contactless pay being the most recent development. 
The growth of e-commerce has been linked to the use of electronic payment and firms, such as PayPal, 
have developed to make this process easier and safer. Mobile payments are also now becoming used on 
a much wider basis and Apple Pay and Android Pay are examples of a new level of customer friendly 
applications to set up and make payments. 


===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 61  
There are many advantages to a business of having technology based payment systems. These include: 
 Lower costs 
 Quicker receipt of money 
 Happy customers who find it convenient 
 No need for cash to be kept or used 
Electronic payment does however have its critics, normally on the basis of security. There have been 
well publicised examples of fraudulent use of banking details and this concern is still the main reason 
why some customers will not use digital payment systems. Disadvantages can therefore be summarised 
as follows: 
 Cost of buying and using payment systems 
 Customers resistance to use of payment systems 
 Not all customers may have access to required technology 
 Risk of fraud 
How businesses are affected by the use of technology 
Every business area can make use of digital technology. Ignoring the pace of change is not an option 
even if in the short run it may be disruptive and expensive, as competitors which do use the technology 
will become more efficient. Those businesses that continue to use old technology will be left behind and 
may not survive. For a small business lack of knowledge, awareness or finance in this area can be a real 
problem. 
Some examples of how technology influences and is used in business activity are: 
Sales – the use of e-commerce, whilst providing many benefits, has also brought a constant need for 
businesses to keep up to date with payment methods and consumer preferences. This will be expensive 
and time consuming to entrepreneurs who are generally very busy. 
Costs – financial recording is now predominantly computer based, with various software packages 
available. Digital applications are also used for electronic billing and payments. Many firms will also use 
programmes for financial modelling and monitoring linked to management information systems which 
are used to provide this data to managers and owners. Software packages are available that are suitable 
for small businesses, but they are often expensive. 
Marketing mix – Digital technology can be used directly in terms of e-commerce and websites. 
Marketing also makes other widespread use of computers in terms of product design, advertising, social 
media and its use of customer databases, which is often linked to market research. Setting up, 
managing and developing technology based promotion are all possible for a small business. However, 
there is a need for entrepreneurs to understand its benefits and afford its costs. 
There will be other uses of digital technology within even a small business and production, human 
resources and the organisation of administration will all make considerable use of the opportunities 
that it provides. 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 62  
Legislation and Business 
Governments introduce legislation in many areas of the economy. This is done to control businesses 
that otherwise might put profits before looking after its customers or treating its employees fairly.  It 
also ensures a fair system, as all businesses in the UK have to meet the same requirements. 
Consumer Laws 
Consumer Rights Act 2015 
This law provides consumers with significant protection when it comes to dealing with businesses. All 
start-up and small businesses, as well as larger businesses, have to ensure that they comply with this 
legislation. The Consumer Rights Act covers product quality, returning goods, repairs and replacements, 
digital content and delivery rights. 
The main requirements include that: 
Goods must fit their description 
• E.g. organic wine really must be organic 
• Businesses need to take care with descriptions – avoid inaccurate claims 
 
Goods and services must be of satisfactory quality 
• The test is whether a “reasonable person” finds them to be satisfactory 
• Goods must work and have no significant defects 
Goods are fit for the purpose specified 
• E.g. a watch should tell the time 
• Businesses should take care when explaining what a product can be used for 
The Trade Descriptions Act 1968 
The Trade Descriptions Act makes it an offence for a trader to make false or misleading statements 
about goods or services. It carries criminal penalties and is enforced by Trading Standards Officers, 
making it an offence for a trader to: 
• apply a false trade description to any goods  
• supply or offer to supply any goods to which a false description has been applied 
• make false statements about the provision of any services, facilities or accommodation 
The Consumer Rights Act and the Trade Descriptions Act are the two main two acts that exist to protect 
consumers. However, consumer protection under the law goes much further.  For example: 
• Businesses may not use unfair commercial practices, for example misleading advertising or 
pressurised selling. 
• Customers have a right to return and be provided with a full refund if goods/services do not 
comply with the law. 
• Services must be completed at a reasonable price and by the time stated.  The customer can 
request that unsatisfactory work be repaired or carried out again at no cost. 


===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 63  
• Since October 2008, consumers buying from home or at work have the right to a “cooling off 
period”. This means if a customer orders a product, such as a mobile phone, by phone or online, 
he/she has 14 days to decide whether he/she wants to keep it or not. 
Effects on business 
There will be costs that businesses will need to pay, for example in terms of increased quality control, to 
make sure that they obey consumer law. There will however, be many benefits to a business of ensuring 
that they do comply with these laws, such as gaining an improved reputation in the marketplace, which 
could lead to an increase in sales, and avoiding bad publicity. 
Breaking any of these laws can lead to a business incurring costs of repair and replacement, increased 
administration costs, as well as gaining a bad name in the market. It can also lead to very high fines for 
the business, which can run into millions of pounds.  
Employment Law 
Equal pay and minimum wage laws 
The basic rule for all businesses in the 2010 Equality Act UK is that: 
Men and women are entitled to equal pay for work of equal value 
… Looking at that rule in a little more detail: 
• “Pay” includes everything in the employment contract - bonuses and pension contributions, as 
well as basic wages or salary 
• Workers have the right to ask their employer for information to check equality – using the equal 
pay questionnaire 
• If employees believe their pay is unequal, they can take the employer to an employment 
tribunal 
Employees must be paid at least the national minimum wage (NMW) by law. Since April 2016, if staff 
members are aged 25 or over, they must be paid at least the national living wage (NLW). The NMW and 
NLW are reviewed and usually changed every year. The rates as at October 2016 and April 2017 are 
shown in the table: 
 
Source: https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates 
 
Effects on business 



===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 64  
The effect of wage legislation on many businesses is often that their wage costs will increase, although 
some businesses will choose to pay above these levels, to attract a higher calibre of staff. They may also 
choose to pay higher than the minimum levels to increase staff motivation and reduce labour turnover. 
This will reduce recruitment costs and increase productivity levels within the business.  
Firms which do not pay minimum wages can face significant fines, as well as receiving bad publicity, 
which will make future recruitment more difficult and may reduce sales. 
Discrimination 
Discrimination is the treatment in an unacceptable way of anyone who is termed to be different.  In 
the UK, it is illegal for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the basis of: 
• Sex, including pregnancy and maternity  
• Marital/civil partnership status  
• A person's disability  
• Race  
• Age  
• Sexual orientation  
• Religion/belief  
• Trade union membership or non-membership  
• Status as a fixed-term or part-time worker 
Discrimination laws apply in many areas of employing staff, for example: 
• Recruitment  
• Employee contract - terms and conditions  
• Promotions and transfers   
• Providing training 
• Deciding which fringe benefits employees receive 
• Employee dismissal   
Employment rights 
An employment right is something to which an employee is entitled, which is protected by law. Laws 
provide a variety of “rights” for employees, including: 
• Reasonable notice before dismissal 
• Right to redundancy 
• Right to a written employment contract 
• Right to request flexible working 
• Right to be paid the national minimum or living wage 
• Right to take time off for parenting 
Health and Safety 
The Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) gives employers the duty to ensure, as far as it is possible, 
the health, safety and welfare at work of all their employees. 
The act requires for example: 
• safe operation and maintenance of the working environment, plant and systems  


===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 65  
• maintenance of safe access to and around the workplace  
• safe use, handling and storage of dangerous substances  
• adequate training of staff to ensure health and safety  
• adequate welfare provisions for staff at work 
In terms of health and safety, management must remember that it is not just concerned about 
protecting staff – health and safety applies to any person who comes into contact with the business.  
That means that proper health and safety needs to be provided to: 
• Employees working at the business premises, from home, or at another site  
• Visitors to the premises, such as customers or subcontractors  
• Employees working at other premises where their business is working, such as on a construction 
site  
• Members of the public - even if they are outside the business premises  
• Anyone affected by the products the business designs, produces or supplies 
For most start-up or small businesses, complying with health and safety does not pose too many 
problems, although the business will incur additional costs to ensure that it complies with the law 
properly. For example, there could be staff training costs on relevant health and safety matters, 
providing appropriate equipment and clothing to staff and lost management time spent checking that 
the business is obeying all aspects of the law. In some industries however, health and safety is really 
important, for example: 
• Food processing (hygiene) 
• Hotels (guest safety, hygiene) 
• Chemical production (dangerous processes, waste disposal) 
• Air travel (passenger safety) 
• Tour operators (holidaymaker safety)  
 
Effects on business of Health and Safety Law 
Many businesses will often say that meeting health and safety requirements can be expensive and make 
them uncompetitive, especially if they face competition from firms in other countries where there are 
less health and safety requirements. However, failure to meet health and safety requirements can result 
in unlimited fines and imprisonment.   
Businesses will also benefit from a safe working environment, as staff will stay working for the business 
and will be happy and more motivated in what they are doing. This will increase productivity levels. 
Businesses will also find it is easier to recruit new employees, if a vacancy arises.   
 
The economy and business 
Governments will all have well established economic policies designed to influence and control how the 
economy operates in their country. They will have aims such as low inflation, high employment, 
increased production and a balance in international trade. The policies used to achieve these objectives, 
which include interest rates and taxation, will all affect businesses both directly and indirectly through 
their effects on consumers and employees. 
Level of employment and unemployment 


===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 66  
Governments will be aiming to have high employment (and low unemployment) in their economy, so 
there will be less people reliant on benefit payments. There are, however, advantages and 
disadvantages to businesses of high levels of employment. These are summarised in the table: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Incomes will be higher, so spending on 
goods and services will increase, 
particularly on non-essential items 
 Workers will be more motivated, as they 
have more job security, increasing 
productivity levels and efficiency 
 
 Fewer workers will be available, resulting in 
new job vacancies being difficult to fill 
 Wages and salaries are likely to increase, as 
fewer workers are available; new and 
existing workers can demand higher pay 
 Increased staff turnover, as it easy for 
workers to move jobs, increasing 
recruitment and training costs 
High unemployment will result in the reverse of the above points and may also cause workers’ skills to 
be lost, particularly in industries using technology. 
There will also be considerable regional variation within a country in terms of employment levels. This 
may encourage businesses to relocate to take advantage of the opportunities that this provides, directly 
through an increase in the amount of available labour or indirectly through government relocation 
grants and subsidies. Some businesses will benefit more than others, depending on whether their goods 
or services are targeted at consumers with high or low incomes. 
Growth and consumer spending  
An increase or decrease in consumer incomes will affect how much money consumers spend and what 
they spend their money on.  
An increase in spending will mean that consumers will purchase more goods and services. Although this 
is an opportunity for local, domestic businesses, they will need to produce more or consumers will buy 
from other countries that may be quicker to expand production and fulfil customer needs more 
efficiently. If production cannot increase to meet customer demand, there is a possibility that increased 
consumer spending might lead to prices rising and inflation taking place. When a decrease in consumer 
spending occurs, the above effects are reversed. 
When an increase or decrease in income levels happens, consumers will purchase different goods and 
services. For example, when there is an increase in income levels, businesses that produce luxury goods 
and services will do very well. Businesses that produce more basic products might see a decrease in 
demand, even though overall customer spending is increasing. This is because customers may switch 
from buying lower priced products, such as Tesco value beans to buying a branded product, such as 
Heinz beans. Demand for some products however, will remain near enough constant, despite changes 
in income levels. Examples of these products include bread, milk and eggs, as they are seen as necessity 
items.  
Inflation 
Inflation is a prolonged period of rising prices in an economy. The UK economy has had very low 
inflation for many years. If inflation were to increase this would mean that the prices of goods and 
services would increase and there would normally be corresponding increases in wage rates, so that 
consumers could afford the higher prices. 


===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 67  
The effect of inflation on business can therefore be seen in two parts: costs and demand. 
Increased costs – wage costs and the cost of materials will rise. This can prove difficult for businesses, as 
they will always want costs to reduce. It can lead to pay disputes with workers or a decrease in quality 
of materials purchased in order to save money.  
Increased prices – the increased costs will be passed onto the customers. This may reduce demand as 
consumers find cheaper products from goods imported into the country. Some consumers will also not 
have an increase in their wages. The increased prices might also cause a fall in demand if they sell their 
products to other countries, which have lower or no inflation. 
As well as the additional work involved in managing inflation, there is always the risk of a wage – price 
spiral  where wage increases lead to price increases which lead to further wage increases and so on. The 
inflation rising out of control will damage most businesses in an economy. 
Taxation 
Taxation will affect businesses directly and indirectly. Firstly businesses will be taxed on their profits. 
This is known as income tax for a sole trader or partnership. A company pays corporation tax which 
affects all business with revenue of over £300,000 a year. The rate at which businesses are taxed has 
been reduced in recent years to encourage businesses to stay in the UK rather than moving to other 
countries, which may tax profits at lower rates.  
Businesses will also be affected by taxes on consumer income and expenditure. Direct taxes on 
consumers include income tax. If this increases then consumers will have less money to spend, so 
businesses will suffer (see consumer spending). There are also indirect taxes that consumers pay on 
their spending, VAT being the most important. 20% is currently added to the price of most goods and 
services. Changes to VAT are used by the government to encourage or discourage consumer spending. 
Interest rates 
In recent years, interest rates have been very low in the UK.  Any change overall or in the direction of 
interest rates, can influence consumer and business behaviour considerably. An increase in interest 
rates may cause the following to happen: 
Direct effects: 
• Business loans will be more expensive. This will discourage investment and may mean 
businesses become less competitive or are reluctant to expand 
• Costs may increase, as the cost of existing loans/overdrafts may be higher, dependent on the 
terms of the borrowing 
• Businesses may choose to save money to earn the higher interest, rather than spend it 
Indirect effects: 
• Consumers will spend less, as it is more expensive for them to borrow money to fund 
expenditure 
• Consumers will also spend less, as they will be more inclined to save more if interest rates are 
increasing 
• Consumers may also spend less, as their costs on existing debts, such as loans and mortgages, 
may increase, meaning they have less disposable income to spend on other purchases, 
particularly non-essential goods and services, such as going to the cinema. Certain businesses 
will therefore see a drop in sales, revenue and therefore profit 


===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 68  
• The exchange rate may increase, making the costs of goods sold by businesses to other countries 
more expensive 
Exchange rates 
Where businesses trade with other customers and suppliers in other countries, they will need to take 
into account the value of that country’s currency. This exchange rate and changes to this exchange rate 
will affect the prices that have to be paid and the amount that can be earned from overseas trade.  
Imports are goods and services that are purchased from other countries. These might be raw materials 
or finished products or services purchased by consumers. Exports are goods and services sold to 
businesses and consumers in other countries.  
If the exchange rate changes so that the currency appreciates, then it will be worth more. This means 
that it will cost more for businesses located outside of the UK to buy the UK currency or pound sterling. 
It will also be cheaper for businesses located in the UK to buy another country’s currency. This means 
that imports into the UK will be cheaper and exports will become more expensive.  
As a result if a country’s currency is appreciating then it is: 
• bad for a business that exports, as its goods will become more expensive in the countries that it 
sells its goods in, so sales will decrease 
• good for consumers, as prices of imports will decrease and they can get different and cheaper 
goods and services 
• good if a business imports raw materials, as the business will be able to buy more of these raw 
materials for the same UK converted price. This will reduce business costs, which would give it 
more flexibility with pricing. This is very important if the business operates in a competitive 
market, as a reduction in prices could result in an increase in sales, which if costs are controlled 
could lead to an increase in profits  
• bad for a local business that may not be able to compete against the cheap imports 
If a currency depreciates than it will be worth less (devaluation) and be cheaper for other countries and 
businesses to buy. This is often seen as a disadvantage to a country, but in reality there are some 
businesses which will gain from this situation and others that will lose, which can be described as 
follows: 
• good for a business that exports, as its goods will be cheaper so sales might increase  
• bad for consumers, as prices of imports will increase, so they will have to spend more to get the 
same imported goods and services 
• bad if a business imports raw materials, as it may increase its costs which might cancel out the 
benefits of cheaper export prices 
• good for local businesses, as they will be able to compete better against cheaper imports  
Fluctuations in exchange rates cause uncertainty in business and will impact on business decision-
making. Since Brexit, the pound sterling has fallen in value, which has resulted in exports becoming 
cheaper, but imports becoming more experience. Changes in the exchange rate such as this, might 
discourage businesses from trading internationally, as it will impact on the profits that a business 
makes.  


===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 69  
These effects are often summarised using the word SPICED: 
S trong 
P ound 
I mports 
C heaper 
E xports 
D earer 
 
 
The importance of external influences  
External influences are very important for all businesses, but this is particularly so for a small or new 
business, as these influences, and changes to them, are outside the control of a business. Businesses 
will however, be affected by these factors and have to react to them. A good business will also be 
looking to the future and anticipating any changes and how they best should prepare for them. These 
changes can be local, national or international. For example, how will a business be affected if interest 
rates rise? Or if the large factory nearby closes? Or the minimum wage is increased significantly? 
Successful businesses are those businesses that are prepared and have a plan in place for these 
changes. 
In order to summarise the way external influences can result in changes of business strategy and 
planning we can consider a few examples on a small independent hotel business: 
External change Impact on business Reaction of business 
Increase in income tax 
rates 
 Business costs increase and 
consumer income decreases  
 Reduced demand for goods and 
services, dependent on the nature 
of the product, for example there 
would be less demand for luxury 
goods 
In the example set, the business may see 
a drop in demand from wealthier 
customers, as they can no longer spend 
their income on short breaks, but must 
spend their income on their mortgage 
• Short term price 
reductions to fill hotel 
• Some staff reductions to 
save costs 
• Advertisements in other 
countries as possible new 
markets  
New anti-pollution law All businesses need to recycle higher 
percentage of waste materials.  
 Costs increased and profits 
decrease 
• Room prices to customers 
increased, dependent on 
rivals 
• Other cost savings made in 
reducing staffing, less 
marketing and less training 


===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 70  
External change Impact on business Reaction of business 
Increase in e-shopping 
using mobile phones 
 Drop in sales booked through 
reception and loss of sales to 
other hotels that were quick to 
adopt online bookings through 
mobile phones 
• Investment in e-sales and a 
website which is 
compatible with smart 
phones 
• Daytime hotel reception 
staff made redundant 
• Price reductions for online 
bookings 
 
 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 71  
Theme 2 – Building a business
