2.1 Growing the Business 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must also appreciate this topic’s 
relationship with the other topic areas in this theme and how this might affect business decision-
making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business growth Methods of growth: internal and external 
Public limited companies 
Sources of finance for growing and large businesses: internal and 
external 
Changes in business aims 
and objectives 
Reasons why business aims/objectives change over time 
How business objectives change over time 
Business and globalisation Impacts of globalisation 
Barriers to international trade 
Competing internationally: e-commerce and the marketing mix 
Ethics, the environment and 
business 
Ethics versus profit 
Environmental considerations and sustainability 
Pressure group impact on the marketing mix 
 
Business Growth 
Most businesses want to expand – to grow sales, increase profits, add new locations or extra outlets 
and take on more staff.  However, expansion is not always easy; nor is it the most appropriate option 
for some businesses, for example those businesses that operate in a very specific niche or specialist 
market, which does not allow for growth. 
What do we mean by expansion?  In general, expansion is about making the business bigger.  However, 
business size can be measured in different ways and this should be remembered when determining 
whether a business is growing or not. Listed below are different ways that business growth can be 
determined:  
• Are sales increasing? 
• Is the amount of profit generated going up? 
• Has the capital invested in a business risen? 
• Is the volume or output produced rising? 
• Are there an increasing number of employees working for the business? 
• Is the number of outlets or locations the business operates in growing? 


===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 72  
• Is the value of the business going up (market capitalisation: current share price x number of 
shares issued) 
• Is the market share getting bigger? 
 
A useful way to compare and contrast the options for business expansion is to think in terms of internal 
(organic) and external (inorganic) growth.  These options will be possible for most businesses and many 
will do both. 
Internal or organic growth 
Internal or organic growth can be defined as: 
“expansion from within a business by expanding the number 
 and/or range of products and/or locations” 
Internal or organic growth builds on the business’s own capabilities and resources.  For many 
businesses, this is the only expansion method used.  Internal growth involves approaches such as: 
- By designing and developing new product ranges  
- Changing the marketing mix to launch existing products directly into new markets, for example 
exporting. This can also be linked to an introduction or development of e-commerce  
- Opening new business locations – either in the domestic market or overseas  
- Investing in research and development to support new product development and innovation 
- Investing in additional production capacity or new technology to allow increased output and 
sales volumes 
- Training employees to help them acquire new skills and address new technology 
Business growth case studies 
Just Eat Just Eat was set up in 2001 and has grown rapidly. It is now the world’s leading 
marketplace for online food delivery, operating in 12 countries. They provide a service 
linking the consumer with local take aways, serving everything from pizza to sushi to 
burgers to burritos! They have grown rapidly with the ability to order online. Their 
advertising has focussed on smart phone applications with the slogan “just a tap 
away”. This has resulted in consumers being able to order online from their favourite 
local take-away, even if it is a small sole trader business, creating a clear example of 
internal or organic growth through e-commerce and advancements in technology. 
Aldi In 2017, Aldi overtook the Co-op as Britain’s 5th largest supermarket chain. Its 
marketing mix aims to provide high quality, own branded products at the lowest 
possible price. Aldi’s innovative “Like Brands” and “Swap & Save” marketing 
campaigns, which included the use of emails, have improved customer opinion of Aldi. 
These campaigns have also increased Aldi’s sales per store by +100% over 3 years, 
through the creation of more loyal customers. Its advertising and social media 
campaigns have also created positive feedback and encouraged new customers to try 
out Aldi as a supermarket. 
Premier Inn Hotel chains, such as Premier Inn, continue to report strong growth which is spreading 
from London to other UK cities, such as Birmingham, Leeds and Edinburgh. Demand 
has increased from both the business and leisure sectors throughout the UK and 
investment in new hotels and hotel refurbishments is at record levels. This shows a 


===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 73  
clear example of internal or organic expansion through the opening up of new hotels. 
Apple Apple is one of the biggest companies in the world. It has grown rapidly over the last 
ten years and its turnover represents 1.25% of the sales revenue of the whole US 
economy. By investing 30% of its budget in research and development (2016), Apple is 
able to continually bring out new versions of its existing iPhones, iPads and iMacs. This 
has not only encouraged existing customers to upgrade their current devices, but also 
creates new customers, often switching from rival products. Apple has also been able 
to develop new products, such as iWatches and virtual reality developments, to 
continue fuelling its growth. 
Yorkshire 
Pianos 
Yorkshire Pianos was set up in 2012 to fill a gap in the market for British made pianos. 
The pianos, which are made in Yorkshire under the Cavendish brand, quickly became 
successful and with imported piano prices increasing, sales in the firm grew rapidly. In 
2014, the company visited the Shanghai Trade Show. It was very popular and in 2016, 
Yorkshire Pianos started to export its products to China, with the typical customer 
being a family with at least one child learning to play. British pianos have a distinctive 
tone, being more “mellow” than the brighter sounding brands, such as Yamaha.  
Keep a look out for these kinds of business stories and other individual business case studies. Add them 
to your notes. Has the business achieved internal or organic growth by adding new products, expanding 
into new geographical areas or increasing its share of the market? 
Advantages and disadvantages of internal or organic growth 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of internal or organic growth? Here is a summary: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Less risky than taking over other businesses   Growth achieved may be dependent on the 
growth of the overall market  
 Can be financed through internal funds, for 
example retained profits 
 Harder to build market share if business is 
already a leader  
 Builds on the strengths of the business, for 
example the brand 
 Slow growth – shareholders may prefer 
more rapid growth  
 Allows the business to grow at a more 
steady rate 
 Retained profits may be used to finance 
internal growth; this may increase the risk, 
as there is less left “just in case” the 
business needs money quickly at another 
point in time. This also means there would 
be less to distribute to shareholders or 
owners  
External or inorganic growth 
In order to speed up its growth, many businesses choose a strategy of external or inorganic growth and 
expand through mergers or takeovers.  
Takeovers are where one business buys a controlling interest in another. For a company, this would 
mean buying over half of the shares in that company. These might be agreed by the company being 
taken over, but in some cases it is not and is therefore known as a hostile takeover. The firm being 
taken over will cease to exist and its staff and resources will be owned by the business making the 
takeover. 


===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 74  
Mergers are where two businesses agree to join together to make a new business. 
Takeovers and mergers happen for many different reasons and the two firms involved may be 
competitors to each other, suppliers or customers to a business, or the businesses involved may have 
related, or in fact unrelated, products. 
Advantages and disadvantages of external or inorganic growth 
 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Benefits from economies of scale, 
decreasing the cost of producing each 
unit 
 Diseconomies of scale can occur if a business 
becomes too large, resulting in an increase in 
the cost of producing one unit 
 Reduced competition and increased 
market share allowing a business to 
have more security and to possibly 
increase prices 
 Resentment and clashes of culture may occur 
between different businesses, which may 
reduce the effectiveness of the merger or 
takeover 
 Risk is spread if products are different to 
the core product 
 May need to make some workers redundant, 
especially at management level, which can 
reduce motivation 
 The two businesses may allow a transfer 
of knowledge, skills and/or technology. 
Goods and services can be shared  
 The cost savings may not be easy to achieve 
quickly, as staff will need to be made 
redundant and premises and equipment sold 
 Larger businesses may be able to raise 
money more easily and have more 
buying power to get cheaper raw 
materials 
 The firm making the takeover may not have 
enough knowledge of the other business to 
make the new business successful 
 Costs might be saved as the businesses 
might have duplicated facilities, for 
example headquarters, outlets in the 
same places 
 If a business grows too large or too quickly it 
may become inefficient in terms of 
management and worker motivation 
Examples of mergers and takeovers 
As you look through the business media you should come across many examples of mergers and 
takeovers: 
Facebook & 
WhatApp 
In February 2014, Facebook bought messaging app “WhatsApp” in a deal worth 
a total of $19bn (£11.4bn) in cash and shares. WhatsApp has more than 450 
million monthly users and is popular with people looking to avoid text messaging 
charges. WhatsApp gives Facebook Zuckerberg inroads into international 
markets and, as importantly, to a younger demographic.  
Microsoft & LinkedIn In June 2016, Microsoft bought the business-focused social network LinkedIn for 
$26.2bn (£18.5bn) in cash, its biggest ever purchase. The takeover was agreed 
by both companies. Microsoft said that acquiring the LinkedIn network would 
give it a competitive advantage and fit well with its business-focused software, 


===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 75  
such as Office.  
Heinz & Kraft In March 2015, H.J. Heinz Co, famous for its ketchup and baked beans, merged 
with Kraft Foods, famous for macaroni and cheese in a box, as well as brands, 
such as Maxwell House coffee. This change created the third-largest US food 
company. The deal meant each share was exchanged for one share in the new 
combined company, plus a cash dividend of $16.50 per share. Heinz 
shareholders own 51% of the shares, Kraft shareholders the rest. 
Public limited company (plc) 
Most of the largest businesses in a country will be public limited companies. Famous examples of public 
limited companies based in the UK include Unilever, Tesco ad GSK. 
Plcs are complicated and expensive to set up, but this type of company can raise large sums of money 
through listing its shares on the stock exchange for the public to buy. Buyers of plc shares may be 
financial institutions and investment or pension funds, or they may be just ordinary members of the 
general public. The key fact to remember is that, in theory, “anyone” can become a shareholder in a 
public limited company, unlike in a private limited company, where there is more control over who is 
allowed to become a shareholder in the business. 
Trading on the stock exchange makes it easier to value and to buy and sell shares in a plc. The trading of 
shares in this way can however, make the company vulnerable to a possible takeover. This could mean 
that the original owners/shareholders of the company can lose control, if they end up holding less than 
50% of the shares.  
A plc must have at least two shareholders and at least £50,000 of share capital. The Board of Directors 
is, like a private limited company, appointed by the shareholders. There is however, more of a 
separation of roles between shareholders, directors and those who manage the company on a day-to-
day basis in a plc. 
Advantages and disadvantages of public limited companies  
 
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Public Limited 
Company 
 Limited liability – protects the 
personal wealth of the 
shareholders 
 Can raise large sums of finance 
via the stock exchange, which is 
permanently invested in the 
business 
 Stable form of structure – 
business continues to exist even 
when shareholders change 
 Firm is more prestigious and 
can receive lots of publicity 
 Shareholders may not agree 
with how the profits have been 
distributed or undistributed by 
the board of directors in the 
business 
 Greater administrative costs 
 Finance can be limited by the 
stock market valuation of the 
company 
 Public can see company 
information and accounts 
 Risk of company being taken 
over 
 Separation of ownership and 
control 


===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 76  
Sources of finance for growing and established businesses 
Growing businesses or large businesses have access to a greater number of sources of capital or finance. 
One reason for this is they are viewed as less risky, as they are larger and therefore would have more 
assets to act as security against a loan for example, and therefore there is less danger that a public 
limited company would not be able to successfully make repayments. 
 
These sources of finance can be divided into internal and external sources: 
Internal sources of finance 
The main internal sources of finance for an established or growing business are: 
• Retained profits 
• Selling assets 
Retained profits 
Retained profit is by some way the most important and significant source of finance for an established 
profitable or growing business. 
The idea is simple.  When a business makes a net profit, the shareholders have a choice: either extract it 
from the business, by way of a dividend, or reinvest it by leaving profits in the business.   
Some of these profits might be in the bank; some might be spent on additional property and machinery; 
perhaps some are reinvested in more inventory or used to reduce bank overdrafts or loans. 
Retained profits have several major advantages: 
 They are cheap, though not free, as the cost for shareholders of leaving profits in the business is 
the return they could have obtained elsewhere i.e. through investing. 
 They are very flexible – management have complete control over how they are reinvested and 
what proportion is kept rather than paid as dividends. 
 They do not dilute the ownership of the company. 
There are however some disadvantages of using retained profits: 
 Directors of large, profitable businesses are sometimes criticised for having lower dividends 
because they are keeping too much cash in the business.  If retained profits do not result in 
higher profits, then there is an argument that shareholders could make better returns by having 
the cash for themselves! 
Selling assets 
Selling spare or unwanted non-current assets, such as spare land, buildings, machinery or equipment, 
that are no longer needed by the business, can result in extra finance being generated on a one off 
basis.  
 Using this method will mean that no finance needs to be repaid and the business owners keep 
full control of the organisation. 
 It is however, unlikely to be a long-term solution for most businesses that need to raise finance, 
as money will be raised on a one-off basis. This method will also reduce the value of the 
business, as the business will no longer own these assets. 


===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 77  
The sale of assets often occurs when management grow the business through mergers and takeovers.  
The combined businesses may have excess assets which can then be sold to raise finance. 
External sources of finance 
There are many ways for a larger business to raise finance from external providers. The main methods 
are: 
Loan capital 
The two main types of bank finance are overdrafts and loans. 
Bank overdrafts 
Businesses of all sizes use bank overdrafts as a means of finance.  As a business gets bigger, it often 
finds that its overdraft facility also needs to grow.  That is because an overdraft is essentially a short-
term source of finance that is available to help fund the day-to-day payments required by a business. It 
allows the business to withdraw funds from its account that are not there, up to an agreed maximum 
limit and is only used when the business requires additional, temporary amounts of money. 
 The big advantage of a bank overdraft is its flexibility. If a business experiences a short-term 
shortage of cash or an unexpected cost, then it can be paid by using some of the overdraft 
facility.  Interest is only paid on the amount used. 
 The main downside of an overdraft is that it is repayable to the bank at any time. A business may 
have an overdraft facility of £100,000 i.e. it can owe the bank up to that amount, but the bank 
may lower or even withdraw that facility at any time.  This happened to numerous businesses 
with bank overdrafts during the credit crunch of 2007-8, many of whom were relying on their 
overdraft to stay in business.  
 The other drawback of an overdraft is that they usually have high levels of interest attached to 
them, making them an expensive form of finance when they are used.  
Bank loans 
A bank loan is an amount of money borrowed for a set period within an agreed repayment schedule. 
The repayment amount will depend on the size and duration of the loan and the rate of interest.   
Many businesses use bank loans to finance their business activities.  However, bank loans tend to be 
more available for well-established and growing businesses, rather than start-up businesses.  The 
reason for this is risk – banks prefer to loan to successful businesses, which makes them more likely to 
be able to repay the loan and interest. 
If a bank loan can be obtained then there are several advantages for a growing business: 
 The business is guaranteed the money for a certain period - generally three to ten years (unless 
it breaks the loan conditions). 
 Loans can be matched to the lifetime of the equipment or other assets the loan is for. 
 While interest must be paid on the loan, there is no need to provide the bank with a share in the 
business, so no control is lost. 
 Interest rates may be fixed for the term, making it easier to forecast interest payments and cash 
flow. 
 Repayments are made in instalments, resulting in the business having access to substantial 
amounts of cash that does not need to be paid back all in one-go.  
There are also some disadvantages of a bank loan: 


===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 78  
 Security - normally has to be given to the bank on some of the assets of the business.  The bank 
will have control over these assets if the business fails. 
 Lack of flexibility - a growing business might take a loan out for £500,000 but finds it only 
needed £300,000.  That means that interest is being paid on £200,000 of loan that it does not 
need. 
 Interest – interest must be paid on the loan amount, which increases the costs of the business. 
Share capital 
Both private and public companies can raise finance by selling new shares in the company.  For the 
purpose of this section, we concentrate on the main options open to a publicly-quoted company – i.e. a 
company whose shares are quoted and traded on a recognised stock exchange. 
The two main options available are: 
Flotation – new issue of shares 
A flotation is a way that a company can raise large sums of money for a new or existing business. It 
involves selling shares in the company to investors through the stock market.  A stock market flotation is 
an expensive way of raising new capital because of the costs involved in the sale of the shares. 
The major change that arises from a flotation is that the shareholder base of the company becomes 
much wider; potentially many thousands of private shareholders invest in the business alongside the 
larger “institutional” investors, such as pension and insurance scheme funds. 
Rights issue 
A rights issue is a relatively common way for a company to raise fresh capital.  The company issues new 
shares, offering them first to existing shareholders. Shares in a rights issue will often be offered at a 
significant discount to the current market price, particularly if the shareholders’ “appetite” for the 
shares needs to be encouraged. 
What is the best source of finance for a growing or large business? 
With such a wide range of potential sources of finance, the truth is that there is no such thing as the 
ideal or recommended source of finance for a large or growing business. Several factors determine the 
type and amount of finance that a growing business needs.  The most important of these are: 
Factor Explanation 
Profitability A business that has strong profitability is often able to finance expansion 
through reinvesting profits, rather than looking for external finance. 
Management track 
record 
External finance providers, for example banks and venture capitalists, will look 
closely at the abilities and experience of the business management team.  They 
do this to determine the risks involved in providing finance. 
Short or long-term The nature or reason for the finance is a key consideration.  If finance is 
required for long-term growth, for example to pay for a new warehouse or 
factory, then that would support the use of bank loans or share capital (long-
term sources) rather than bank overdrafts or trade credit (short-term sources). 
Legal structure A public company has the option of raising finance via public stock markets.   


===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 79  
Changes in business aims and objectives 
As a business grows, its objectives may well change. Established businesses will also expect to change 
their objectives if the external environment is different. A business specialising in luxury products might 
aim for strong growth in an economy that is doing well, but may have to change this to survival if the 
economy weakens or a strong new competitor arrives. 
Objectives are often set in financial terms.  Those could include: 
• How much profit the business wants to earn 
• The targeted level of sales for the next year 
• How fast the business wants to grow, for example percentage increase in sales 
• How much profit is to be paid out to shareholders in dividends 
However, business objectives do not have to be expressed in money terms, or in a way that can be 
measured. Some objectives are hard to quantify, but are often important.  For example, an objective a 
business might set may be to become recognised as… 
• An innovative player in the market 
• A leader in the quality of customer service (compared with the competition) 
Both of these objectives do not have obvious quantitative measures. 
Changes to objectives 
There will be various causes of a business choosing or having to change its objectives. This could be due 
to internal reasons, such as a change in ownership, for example The Body Shop was taken over by profit 
maximising L’Oreal, which would/may conflict with the ethical objectives of The Body Shop. New 
directors/managers could also want the business to expand in a particular direction, for example 
through international expansion. There will also be changes to the business environment which a 
business cannot control, but will affect the achievement of a business’s objectives.  
Some examples of how internal and external influences could affect a business are summarised here: 
Cause of 
change 
Explanation  Example of effect on the 
business and the 
achievement of its objectives 
Possible new objective 
Market 
conditions 
The current situation in 
the market that the 
business operates in e.g. 
economic conditions, 
competition, changing 
tastes and fashions 
If there is increased 
competition or decreased 
consumer wealth, this could 
mean increasing sales may be  
unachievable 
Objectives may change 
from growth to survival 
or in reverse if market 
conditions improve 
Change in 
technology 
Advances in technology 
such as new IT capabilities 
New technology could 
significantly reduce costs, 
making it easier for a business 
to increase profits 
Objectives such as 
reducing staffing levels 
could be introduced to 
reduce costs to pay for 
the new technologies 


===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 80  
Cause of 
change 
Explanation  Example of effect on the 
business and the 
achievement of its objectives 
Possible new objective 
Change in 
legislation 
New laws introduced such 
as changing the minimum 
wage, or shops charging 5p 
for carrier bags 
The new laws could affect 
sales, employment or 
production and may increase 
costs or decrease revenue 
Profit targets reduced 
because of the 
increased costs caused 
by the new legislation 
Internal 
reasons 
Internal factors such as 
management capability, 
availability of employees 
or the financial position 
could all change  
If there are less employees 
available then costs might 
increase to retain staff or to 
pay for overtime, reducing 
profits 
If the managers cannot 
cope with the 
expansion aimed for 
due to a lack of 
expertise of staff, then 
the business might stop 
trying to grow and 
reduce its product 
range 
Businesses will always be changing and adapting to change. This will be due to some of the changes 
identified above and how the business itself evolves over the years. New managers may bring in fresh 
ideas. Managers may therefore have to adjust objectives to take into account internal and external 
changes, including particularly the performance of the business. 
There will always be a clear sequence: 
Existing objective 
Change causing factor 
Effect on current business objective 
New business objective 
Globalisation 
In recent years, the world has increasingly become one market. The introduction of new technology, 
economic development and improved travel have all meant that businesses can consider selling their 
products anywhere in the world. Trade between countries is now much more important than it ever has 
been and as a result, there has been an increase in free trade agreements between countries. 
Globalisation also affects decisions regarding business location. Businesses can either be completely or 
partly based outside of their own/home country.  
Multinational firms, businesses that produce goods in more than one country, have become increasingly 
powerful as worldwide brands. 
There have been huge advantages to businesses of global trading, but there have also been many 
challenges and adjustments that have had to be made to the way businesses now operate: 


===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 81  
Globalisation – Benefits and Drawbacks 
 
Benefits Drawbacks 
Globalisation has resulted in increased markets for 
businesses small and large through exporting. Use 
of e-commerce and better distribution has made 
global markets a reality for many businesses. 
Businesses can also find cheaper raw materials 
and production opportunities through imports. 
Where countries have a cost advantage in the 
production of a good or service, they have been 
able to specialise in its production and sell 
throughout the world at cheaper costs. This could 
be due to easier access to raw materials, climate 
advantages or skilled labour. Globalisation has 
therefore impacted where different businesses or 
industries locate. 
Because there is more competition, firms have had 
to become more efficient, which has resulted in 
consumers having more choice at lower prices of 
better quality or designed products. 
 
With international cooperation and global trade, 
there has been an increasing transfer of 
knowledge and skills throughout the world. This 
has led to increased use of technology and more 
efficient production. 
Domestic firms have had to face competition from 
businesses throughout the world through imports. 
Many of these businesses have cheaper costs and 
larger scale production and as a result other 
businesses may close. 
Multinational firms have become very powerful 
with their global brands. 
Some complete industries have closed and this has 
caused a need for new businesses to be 
established and training for the unemployed 
workers whose jobs no longer exist. There is no 
longer coal mined in the UK, so all the miners have 
had to find other jobs.  
 
In the UK there has been a decrease in skilled 
manufacturing and an increase in the service 
industry. This has led to changes away from 
manual skills to managerial and in many cases low 
level service jobs. 
 
An economy is now vulnerable to world economic 
conditions. If there is a change in the economic 
situation in one country, this will affect many 
other economies.  A downturn in the economy of 
the USA will cause the UK economy to also suffer, 
as export sales to the USA decrease. 
 
Barriers to international trade 
Economic theory would say that all countries can benefit in the long run if there is free trade between 
them. This means that imports and exports can be exchanged between countries with no barriers to 
trade in existence, such as tariffs, quotas (a restriction on the amount of goods that can come into a 
country) or regulations. Barriers to trade is where a government imposes regulations to restrict the flow 
of international products into its country. 
In reality, countries will prioritise the short term needs of their own economy, which means barriers to 
trade are often implemented. There are many reasons for this practice, such as allowing domestic new 


===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 82  
industries to develop, protecting jobs from foreign competition and retaliating against other countries 
that are also protecting their economy through similar measures. 
Tariffs are one of the most common methods used to restrict trade. They are a tax on imports and will 
allow the businesses which produce similar products within the home or domestic country to grow, or 
at least to survive, against foreign competition. They can allow businesses to adjust to these new 
threats, but equally may encourage inefficiency. Tariffs will also reduce consumer choice and increase 
the price of products.   
Trade blocs, such as the European Union, offer the opportunity for free trade within the group of 
trading nations. They are likely however, to charge high tariffs on imported products from countries 
outside of the trading bloc, so consumers once again can suffer through restricted choice and higher 
prices. Because of this, businesses which export to countries outside of the trading bloc may face 
restrictions, such as tariffs and quotas, on their exports to these countries. At times, if a business 
exports heavily to a particular country or trading bloc, it may open a site within that trading bloc to 
avoid these barriers to trade. 
There are benefits to consumers of the existence of trading blocs, for example cheaper products from 
countries within the trading bloc and to businesses which export within the bloc, although they will still 
face competition from other businesses. 
International competition for UK businesses 
UK businesses face both the challenges and opportunities of the global market, as described previously. 
This has been made more complicated by the Brexit vote, which means that traditional trading links 
within the EU will change when the UK leaves the EU.  This will affect both UK firms which export to 
other EU countries, as well as UK firms which compete against imports from the EU. There will 
undoubtedly be new markets through new trade deals with non EU countries, but equally there will be 
new firms seeking to enter the UK market, which will pose a threat to existing UK producers. 
There are many areas where the UK is a world leader and these tend to be where innovation and design 
are important. Science and technology has been a traditional strength, but the UK is also acknowledged 
as a market leader in many areas of industries, including automotive, aerospace and chemical and 
pharmaceuticals. 
Internet and e-commerce 
The availability of the internet has allowed businesses to expand their horizons on a worldwide scale. 
Whilst this would not be suitable for some types of businesses or their products, there will however, be 
a large number of businesses that now sell or produce their products on a global scale. Even small or 
growing businesses can promote, sell and distribute their products using digital communication and e-
commerce. 
Example: Freestyle Xtreme 
Freestyle Xtreme is a specialist UK based company that sells sports clothing and accessories, particularly 
those for extreme sports. The firm decided to expand internationally using Amazon for on-line sales and 
payments. Freestyle Xtreme’s website was first launched in 2004. The business has now developed its 
own online sale sites and uses online market places in many other countries. Its sales revenue has risen 
to £10 million in 5 years. Payments are immediate, through internet based systems, and the UK 
government has encouraged the business by providing financial help towards its distribution costs. 


===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 83  
International marketing 
Traditionally, the four main methods of selling into international markets have been 
• Exporting direct – the business stays in the UK and sells directly to the customer in other 
countries 
• Using overseas distributors and agents – the business uses other businesses or individuals 
(agents) who are based in other countries. They help sell the products, as they know the market, 
in return for a percentage of the price. This practice is very common in the car industry, where 
the manufacturers use “dealers” to sell their cars. 
• Setting up overseas business units – the business will set up a factory in another country to 
make the product, which might be slightly different due to local preferences. 
• Buying a business overseas – a merger or takeover of an overseas firm allows a business to 
“buy” the production unit and to carry on selling to their existing customers. 
 
Online advertising and e-commerce are now making direct exporting a much more cost-effective 
option.  International customers find it relatively easy to discover the products offered by firms of all 
sizes in the UK and complete transactions.  
 
There are however, several changes that businesses will need to consider if international marketing is to 
be successful. 
 
Marketing Aspect International considerations 
Product Are tastes and expectations the same in other countries? Fashions might not be 
the same, climates will vary, cultures will provide different influences and even 
the electrical system might be different. 
Product names and brands might mean something different in other countries. 
There are many well-known examples of this including Coca-Cola’s first 
translation into Chinese as “bite the wax tadpole!”  
Price Income levels in other countries might be very different, even after taking into 
account the exchange rate. Often basic western consumer goods are luxury 
products in other countries and will have a relatively high price compared to local 
alternatives and therefore will only generate low sales. 
Promotion Advertisements and packaging will require translation – websites will need to be 
understood in the countries targeted. Different legislation will need to be 
observed, as well as respecting the cultural norms of other countries. Media used 
will need to be understood, if advertising is to be placed in other countries. 
Place Distribution will clearly need careful checking, both in terms of speed and cost. 
International payment is not straightforward. There are also issues to do with 
trade restrictions, such as tariffs, which might mean there is an additional cost to 
exporting to other countries. 
 
There will continue to be many new challenges for UK businesses in a post Brexit era. Globalisation will 
not go away and it will be those UK businesses that continue to take the initiative and look to the 
opportunities it provides that will succeed. 


===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 84  
Ethics, the environment and business 
In recent years, business stakeholders have taken a much greater interest in the wider aspects of 
business behaviour. These include consideration of ethics, the environment and issues to do with 
sustainability and global warming. 
Business ethics 
Business ethics is concerned as to whether businesses have morally correct behaviour. This can be 
applied to its relationship with suppliers, employees, customers, but will also be relevant to its 
relationship with the wider community. An ethical decision will be one that is based on what is morally 
right, rather than the most profitable option. Ethics should not be confused with the law. A decision 
might be unethical but legal, or ethical and illegal. 
Making an ethical decision may result in increased costs for a business. It may however, lead to good 
publicity and a more positive relationship with its stakeholders. In some cases, ethical behaviours or 
choices will be made because of the moral viewpoint of the business owners, not just because it will 
increase profitability in the long term! 
Some examples of unethical business behaviour are given in the table, together with the impact that 
these decisions could have on the business itself: 
Stakeholder Example Comment 
Consumers Should a business charge very 
high prices where consumers 
have no choice of product? 
Businesses might get extra profits in the short 
run, but its reputation might suffer and new 
competitors could take its trade in the future 
 
Employees Businesses might pay low wages 
and provide poor and unsafe 
working conditions 
Workers may choose to leave the business; 
recruitment may be difficult and the business 
might face industrial action from trade unions. 
Legal action could be taken against the firm, if 
they are not meeting the requirements of the 
law; any fines that result could be expensive and 
the firm’s reputation could be damaged 
Suppliers Cheap suppliers might be using 
unethical practices in the 
production of their goods, such 
as using child labour, paying 
cheap prices or using bribes  
Use of suppliers which exploit their workers can 
cause bad publicity, which may reduce sales; 
businesses are increasingly held accountable for 
the actions and decisions of the suppliers that 
they use 
Community Ignoring local communities by 
polluting the local area 
Avoiding pollution might prevent an increase in 
costs and may improve the reputation of the 
business, increasing sales and making it easier 
for the firm to recruit workers. Ignoring pollution 
issues would have the opposite effect on the 
business 


===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 85  
Fair Trade is a scheme that some businesses agree to. This shows that producers and retailers are being 
ethical in the way they purchase goods and raw materials from developing countries. They pay higher 
prices, so that the workers in the developing countries can receive higher wages and experience a 
better standard of living. 
Advantages and disadvantages of ethical behaviour 
There are arguments for and against ethical behaviour. A business may feel the need to act ethically, 
particularly if a business faces competition from firms in other countries:  
Advantages Disadvantages 
• Sales might increase due to good publicity 
• Improved brand reputation 
• Employees like working for the business; 
easier to recruit and retain staff 
• Meets owners objectives 
• Costs may increase and profits decrease 
• Publicity may not persuade consumers to 
buy 
• Quality or appearance of products may not 
be as good 
Many of these decisions and examples represent a trade-off between ethical behaviour and increased 
profit. Overall, business decisions will be based on the owners’ or board of directors’ preferences and 
the markets in which they operate. An ethical business that goes bankrupt through its actions may 
result in less ethical businesses succeeding even more! 
Environmental issues 
Businesses must follow any legislation that is linked to the environment, but some businesses will 
choose to go beyond this with the environmental policies that they choose to follow. This decision will 
directly link to the firm’s view on ethics.  
Over recent years, there has been an increasing concern about the environment and as such, the 
number of UK laws on business and the environment have increased. Areas such as pollution, waste 
recycling and energy conservation have all increased business costs, as firms must meet these new 
standards. In many cases however, this increase in costs has been passed onto the consumer. 
Consumers will however, generally expect to pay a higher price for goods and services that have been 
produced in a sustainable, more environmentally friendly way, for example, they are happy to pay 
premium prices for organic products. 
Examples of how a business may attempt to reduce the impact on society of different environmental 
considerations are summarised in the table:  
  


===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 86  
 
Environmental 
Consideration 
Possible effects on producers Possible effects on consumers 
Traffic 
congestion  
• Transport might be retimed to 
avoid rush hour 
• Distribution may be moved 
from road to rail 
• Businesses may relocate to 
benefit from better transport 
links 
• Service might be slower 
• Prices may go up because of the 
changes 
• Consumers may buy cheaper 
goods from less environmentally 
friendly sources  
•  
Recycling 
requirements 
• All businesses must try to 
reduce waste 
• Packaging should be minimised 
and be capable of recycling 
• Any waste that can be recycled 
must be separated. This service 
may vary depending on the area 
where the business is based 
• Recycling collections must be 
arranged and paid for 
 
• Consumers will pay more for goods 
and services  
• The society in which people live 
should be more pleasant, as there 
will less rubbish disposal sites in 
the future 
• Resources will last longer, so 
future costs will not increase as 
much 
Waste disposal • Businesses must have all waste 
collected and disposed of 
properly or they can fined  
• This can be combined with 
recycling arrangements 
• Some products, for example 
cooking oil, have strict disposal 
arrangements 
 
• Consumers will pay more for goods 
and services 
• The society in which consumers 
live should be more pleasant as 
there will less rubbish disposal 
sites in the future 
Pollution • Businesses will need an 
environmental permit if they 
produce significant air pollution 
• All businesses must not be a 
nuisance to their neighbours, 
for example smoke, dust, smells 
or noise 
• All businesses must have 
permission to discharge 
industrial waste into the water 
supply and are responsible for 
cleaning up any land 
contaminated  
• Pollution will be reduced 
• Business costs will increase, so 
prices to consumers may increase 
• There will be less need in the 
future for government to increase 
taxes to clean up  
• business pollution 
As can be seen from the table, there are both costs and benefits or trade-offs to producers and 
consumers of a business becoming more environmentally friendly. The success of environmental 
policies will often depend on international comparisons and how well policies are enforced. 


===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 87  
Sustainability 
For an economy to be sustainable it must be able to maintain the current levels of production in the 
future. As many resources are non-renewable, this causes problems for both businesses and consumers. 
Consumers have unlimited wants, yet there are only limited resources in a society. New technology 
and improved communication can make sustainability more possible, however increases in population 
will make it more difficult to achieve.  
Growth in economies and their output has also caused increasing concerns over global warming. Factors 
such as industrial pollution and destruction of rainforests to increase agricultural production have 
caused global temperatures to rise. This change has resulted in increasing costs for businesses, in order 
to deal with the many effects of global warming, such as increased flooding and more unpredictable 
weather. 
Businesses and consumers both have a responsibility that any growth achieved is sustainable, but there 
will be costs. For example, renewable energy will be more expensive, recycling will increase costs and 
choosing more environmentally friendly production methods will mean higher prices. In the short term, 
producers will make less profit and consumers will be able to afford less goods and services, but these 
choices could mean there is a long term future for the world’s population. 
Pressure groups and the marketing mix 
A pressure group is an organisation with members who have a common interest. They will seek to 
change business or government policy through actions which can be peaceful, but involve protest. Their 
actions can also be more forceful and sometimes violent and illegal. 
A business’s marketing policy is often the target for consumer pressure groups. They can see marketing 
as a way to exploit the consumer in favour of excessive business profits. 
Some of the considerations that businesses might make in the light of actual or threatened pressure 
group activity are as follows: 
Product: - There may be objections to products produced by labour that has been exploited or that has 
involved product testing on animals. Products could be made more ethically, based on environmentally 
friendly processes. Supply chains might be changed to ensure there are no issues with suppliers. 
Price: - If too high a price is charged for basic or essential goods, there may be pressure group protests. 
This has happened with petrol and train fares. There have also been successful pressure group 
campaigns to reduce the price of some medicinal drugs. 
The “Treatment Action Campaign” has used mainly peaceful protests such as marches with placards to 
get publicity and reduce the price charged by companies for anti-Aids drugs. This has resulted in 
changes to government policies, so that this is achieved. 
Promotion: - Pressure groups may object to persuasive promotional campaigns. Bulk offer promotions 
by businesses are seen by some pressure groups as encouraging waste. There have also been protests 
against adverts for addictive products or payday loan companies. 
Greenpeace uses professional advertising campaigns against governments and businesses that are not 
in favour or protecting the environment or preventing climate change.  
Place: - With the growth of e-sales, there has been widespread closures of retail and financial outlets 
such as shops, banks and post offices. There have been various local and national pressure group 


===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 88  
campaigns against these measures, claiming that they will hurt the most vulnerable members of our 
society. 
Local awareness and “use it or lose it” campaigns have been run in many villages to prevent the closure 
of their rural post office and shop. These have included village school competitions and poster 
distribution, as well as writing to MPs. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 89
