2.3 Making Operational Decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business operations Purpose of operations 
Production processes (job, batch, flow) 
Productivity 
Technology and its impact 
Working with suppliers Stock management 
Procurement  
Suppliers and logistics 
Managing quality Quality control and quality assurance 
Controlling costs through quality 
The sales process The selling process 
Customer service and its importance 
 
Business operations 
The purpose of business operations is to turn raw materials into goods and services. There are a variety 
of methods that can be used including job, batch and flow production. There are many surrounding 
issues that are involved in making the business operation as efficient as possible. These include ensuring 
that supplies are reliable, quality is good and that the customer service involved in the operation is also 
of a high standard. 
Production processes: Job production 
Job production is typically used by small businesses. It involves making one-off or a small number of 
items. These are often made to the customer’s requirements, ranging from the simple, for example a 
haircut, to the moderately difficult, for example a wedding cake and finally to something long and 
complex, for example building a new bridge.   
Job production often allows a business to make its good or service different to competitors, including 
larger businesses, and is particularly common in the service sector. A made to measure clothes shop can 
be successful, even though there are large multi-national clothes retailers that exist and cater for the 
mass market. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of using job production include: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 104  
 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Products are usually of high quality   Costs of producing one unit or job are 
higher than producing a large number of 
the same good or service 
 Producer meets individual customer 
requirements  
 Labour intensive, as less suited to the use 
of machinery 
 Greater job satisfaction for employees, as 
they are involved in all stages of production  
 Requires skilled employees, who will 
demand higher levels of pay and perhaps 
require ongoing training  
Production processes: Batch production 
Batch production occurs when many similar items are produced together. Each batch of the product 
goes through one stage of the production process before moving onto the next stage together as a 
group.  The products will be similar but have some variation, for example different style, different size 
or different colour. Good examples include: 
• Furniture manufacture 
• Baking / meal preparation 
• Clothing production 
The benefits and drawbacks of batch production include: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Making in batches reduces unit costs, as 
more than one unit is produced at a time, 
meaning fixed costs are spread across 
more units  
 Time lost switching between batches, as 
machinery may need to be reset resulting 
in a reduction in efficiency 
 Can still address specific customer needs 
including size, weight, style. For example 
car manufacturers can vary the colour, 
engine size and extra features even within 
the production of a batch of one model of 
car being produced 
 Need to keep stocks of raw materials, 
which will impact on cash flow, as money is 
tied up in stock and in work in progress i.e. 
products that are moving through the 
production process but are not yet finished 
and therefore cannot be sold 
 Use of specialist machinery and skills can 
increase output and productivity, making 
the process more efficient than job 
production  
 Potentially de-motivating for staff as tasks 
are more repetitive compared to job 
production; this can lower productivity 
Production processes: Flow production 
As a business grows the scale of its operations, it often needs to change its method of production to 
allow it to produce more and increase its production capacity. 
A small business might use job production to provide a personalised or distinctive product.  However, if 
the product is intended for much larger, mass markets, then other methods of production may be 


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 105  
required in order for the product to be produced efficiently.  A key production method in these 
circumstances is flow production. 
Flow production involves a continuous movement of items through the production process.  Flow 
production, also known as mass production, uses production lines to manufacture products. For 
example, in a car manufacturing plant, doors, engines, bonnets and wheels are added to a chassis as it 
moves along the assembly line.  This type of production is appropriate when firms are looking to 
produce a high volume of similar items.  Some of the big manufacturing brand names, that have 
consistently high demand, are most suited to this type of production, for example Heinz baked beans. 
Flow production is capital intensive.  This means it uses a high proportion of machinery in relation to 
workers. 
The benefits and drawbacks of flow production include: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Ideal for large-scale production of mass-
market products  
 Expensive to purchase machinery and to 
set up  
 Less use of labour; a business can more 
easily operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week, reducing the average cost per unit, 
as long as demand for the products in 
question is there 
 Production can be inflexible  
 Workers used can specialise in one job or 
one part of the production process, which 
makes them more efficient 
 Jobs can be repetitive and boring, lowering 
the motivation of workers  
 Can still create personalised products using 
computer-programmed machinery 
 Can involve considerable risk to a business; 
it takes a lot of planning time to organise 
the production process 
Improving productivity 
All businesses want their production operation to be as efficient as possible. In order to do this, they will 
aim to maximise their productivity. 
Productivity can be defined as the amount produced (output) for a given number of employees (input). 
Clearly businesses want this to be as high as possible! 
In order to improve productivity, businesses will invest in their employees through better recruitment, 
training and motivation. They may also invest in better equipment. Although such investments will have 
a short term cost, they will have the potential to save the business money in the long run. 
It should be noted that improving productivity is NOT the same as increasing production. Productivity is 
about efficiency and lowering the average cost of producing goods and services. Production is about 
the total quantity produced. 
There are many benefits of improving productivity. It allows the business to make more profits, as the 
costs of producing a certain amount of goods will be reduced. This is because a firm’s fixed costs are 
spread across more units. This would therefore enable a business to have more flexibility with its pricing 
decisions and give it the opportunity to charge lower prices, because the average cost of making one 
unit is lowered. This means the business will be more competitive. Alternatively, the business could 


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 106  
keep the selling price the same, but with an increase in productivity the business would be able to enjoy 
an increased profit margin on each item sold.  
Production technology 
Computer based technology can have many uses in the production process. It can be used in design or 
in the manufacturing process where it is often linked to the use of robots.  
 
Some of its benefits are: 
 
 It will increase the speed of production. 
 It can reduce the average unit cost significantly compared to using labour. 
 It allows the business to be flexible, as a computer can now be programmed to add in variations 
to meet the customer’s requirements; this is often used in car production. This is a major 
development, as traditionally in the past, machines were very difficult to change and adapt to 
customer requirements.  
 It can also increase the quality of goods, as human variation is removed. As a result, the business 
should always be able to provide a consistent level of quality to its customers. 
 Machines also do not need regular breaks like workers do!  
 
There are however some drawbacks: 
 
 The initial costs are very expensive. 
 Machines can breakdown, resulting in a loss of production time. 
 Machines will need some “downtime” or time for servicing to prevent breakdowns in the future; 
during this time, production will be limited. 
 There may be a waste of capacity if the machines output is not fully needed and therefore it is 
idle for a period of time. 
 
Overall, a business will need to balance the costs of the technology, with the savings and benefits it will 
provide, when making any decisions about investing in technology. 
Working with suppliers 
The relationship a business has with its suppliers is absolutely critical in terms of its success. A supplier is 
another business that supplies goods or services to a business to enable it to function and produce its 
products. 
If a firm’s suppliers produces poor quality raw materials and is unreliable with their deliveries, this will 
affect the performance and reputation of the business. Managing stock in terms of ensuring the right 
quantity is always available at the right time, at the right quality is therefore a very important role 
within any business.  
Stock control 
The overall objective of stock control is to make sure that a business does not run out of stock, but also 
to order stock in a way that the costs of holding stock is minimised. In order to help the stock control 
process, businesses will often use bar gate stock control charts, although in today’s business world, 
these are often computerised and linked to suppliers, so the process of stock control is automatic. 
An example of a traditional bar gate stock control chart is shown below: 


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 107  
 
This bar gate stock graph shows how stock levels decrease over time as stock is used up, until a new 
order arrives when the stock level increases again. 
 
Looking at the example, in week zero the business was holding 800 units of stock. However,  by week 2 
it had used 600 units, as the volume of stock held in week two reached the minimum level the business 
overall wishes to hold of 200 units. This therefore shows that the business was using up stock at a 
steady rate of 300 units per week. In week 2, delivery of 600 units arrives which brought the stock level 
back up to the maximum stock level that the business wants to hold of 800 units. The maximum level of 
800 units may be set at this limit due to a lack of space or alternatively the stock may have a short shelf 
life and therefore there may be a danger that the stock may become out of date if more was held and 
not used. 
 
The new order which arrived in week 2, as already discussed, was triggered at the reorder level of 400 
units. As a new order and delivery of that order takes just under a week to arrive, a new order must be 
placed at 400 units, otherwise the business would end up using some of its buffer stock that it is holding 
“just in case” there is a problem with some stock in the delivery i.e. poor quality or a delivery is late. 
Alternatively, if the business experienced a rush of orders then the buffer stock is there for the business 
to use to ensure that all orders are met successfully and customer service is kept high, due to orders 
being produced and delivered by the business on time! 
The key parts of the bar gate stock graph are therefore: 
Maximum level 
This shows the maximum level of stock a business can or wants to hold.  
• Example from graph: 800 units. 
Re-order level 



===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 108  
This is a trigger point; when stock falls to this level, the next supplier order should be placed.  
• Example from graph: 400 units 
Lead time 
This is the time it takes between placing the order and receiving the stock 
• Example from graph: just under a week 
Minimum stock level or Buffer Sock 
This amount of stock is held “just in case” of unexpected orders; this helps to ensure that such orders 
can be met and other orders can be met in case of any delays in deliveries from suppliers. It is the 
minimum amount of stock the business would want to hold; the firm would not want its stock levels to 
fall below this level, as it may run out and therefore may not be able to satisfy customer orders. 
• Example from graph: 200 units. 
 
Factors affecting when and how much stock to reorder 
There are many factors that a business would need to consider when deciding how much stock to order 
or reorder, to ensure the business can run as efficiently as possible without running out of stock. These 
are: 
Lead-time from the supplier 
• How long it takes for the supplier to deliver the order 
• Longer lead times may require a higher re-order level, for example supplies that are being 
shipped from the Far East may take as long as 8 weeks to arrive into the UK 
Implications of running out of stock altogether i.e. the risk of stock-outs 
• If stock-outs are very damaging to the firm’s reputation and will impact heavily on future 
orders, then businesses should set a higher re-order level and quantity, plus increase the 
amount of buffer stock it holds 
Demand for the product 
• Higher or growing demand normally means higher re-order levels, to ensure that demand 
and orders can be fully met 
Managing stock 
All businesses will set itself a target stock level of finished goods that it should achieve. This is calculated 
to satisfy the demand expected by the marketing department plans and based on what the production 
department thinks it can produce.  If the stock level falls below this level, then the firm’s productivity 
level has fallen since the output per worker has not met the planned requirements.  
Modern manufacturing firms use sophisticated production software to plan production for each period 
of time, which includes ordering the correct stock. The planned output levels will in turn determine how 
many raw materials are kept in stock, to ensure orders can always be met. Stock management also 


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 109  
apply to services, for example the level of staffing that is available to meet expected or unexpected 
demand in a supermarket at the checkout. 
Just in time (JIT) stock control 
Just in time is a method of stock control that applies to raw materials, work in progress and finished 
products. If a business applies this technique then it will minimise the amount of all stock held. 
The successful operation of just in time requires a carefully planned scheduling and flow of resources 
through the production process. Supplies are delivered right to the production line only when they are 
needed. For example, a car manufacturing plant might receive exactly the right number and type of 
tyres for one day’s production and the supplier would be expected to deliver them to the correct 
loading bay on the production line within a very narrow time slot. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of JIT can be summarised as follows: 
Advantages of JIT Disadvantages of JIT 
 Lower stock holding means a reduction in 
storage space, which saves rent and 
insurance costs  
 There is little room for mistakes, as 
minimal stock is kept for re-working faulty 
products 
 As stock is only obtained when it is needed, 
less money is tied up in stock and is 
therefore available for other purposes 
 Production is very reliant on suppliers and 
if stock is not delivered on time, the whole 
production schedule can be delayed  
 There is less likelihood of stock perishing, 
becoming obsolete or out of date  
 There are no spare finished products or 
spare stock available to meet unexpected 
orders, because all products are made to 
meet actual orders. This can lead to lower 
levels of customer service 
 Avoids the build-up of unsold finished 
products that can occur with sudden 
changes in demand  
 No economies of scale possible from bulk 
purchasing and single deliveries 
Successful operation of JIT requires a good relationship with suppliers. To ensure deliveries can be made 
relatively easily and on time, suppliers are normally located relatively close to their customers i.e. the 
business that operates JIT. Overall, if demand is consistent or easy to predict, then JIT is likely to be 
successful.  
Procurement  
Procurement is the process by which suppliers are chosen. This will include deciding what is needed and 
how it is ordered, as well as the process of receiving and managing the goods arrival. Having the right 
suppliers is essential if the business is to succeed. A failure in procurement can lead to a failure of the 
business. 
Procurement is not just the process of choosing a supplier. It is the whole process of managing the 
ordering and receipt of the goods or services ordered. The details of this process are considered below: 
Relationship with suppliers 
There are many factors that will influence the choice of supplier(s) in a business. When making this 
important choice, business managers will need to think about many different issues and prioritise the 


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 110  
most important to their specific business needs. A brief explanation of the possible factors that a 
business may consider when making supplier decisions is provided in the table: 
Factor Explanation 
Cost If a supplier’s prices are cheap, then the business can decrease its selling price and 
potentially make more sales. It could also just make more profit, as the difference 
between its unit cost and the selling price will increase. It is possible that by going for 
the cheaper suppliers however, that quality will suffer and customer satisfaction will 
also decrease, leading to a loss of long term sales. 
Alternatively, if the costs are high, possibly because of high quality, then profit will be 
less. In some cases, the business may be able to increase its selling prices and “pass on” 
the higher costs to its customers. 
Quality High quality suppliers will mean that customer satisfaction will be high, so it is more 
likely they will make repeat purchases and remain loyal. As already discussed, it may 
mean that costs are likely to be more and profit less. 
Delivery  Cost of transporting the supplies may be important in choosing a local supplier. It is no 
good buying cheaper supplies if the delivery costs are very expensive. 
Speed of delivery will be important in some industries. If the goods are likely to perish 
or deteriorate over time, such as fresh fruit and vegetables or flowers, then the speed 
of delivery is critical. 
Reliable delivery is essential if a business has a short turn-around time for delivering its 
product to its customers or if it uses JIT. The business will want a supplier that can 
deliver, so it does not run out of stock.  
Availability For a supplier to be of use it must be able to supply the business with goods of the 
quality required at the time that they are needed. In some cases, a supplier may be 
able to source suppliers from elsewhere if needed at short notice, dependent if they 
have spare capacity i.e. room in their production schedule to fit another order in. In 
this case however, quality checks would need to be performed, to ensure quality 
standards are maintained. 
Trust 
 
Some suppliers will have too many orders at certain times than it is able to cope with. 
For a long term supply relationship to work, then a regular, loyal business will expect to 
have priority over occasional customers. This will mean that supplies will always be 
available when required. 
A business may also use the following additional criteria to base its supplier choice on: 
• Industry: in some industries it is essential that prices are set as low as possible, as profits are 
small and quality is less of a priority. This applies in industries which are very competitive. 
• Cash flow/finance: some businesses may not have the cash flow to pay suppliers which might 
have good quality and fairly priced goods, but which require immediate cash payment for them. 
Some suppliers offer credit to the purchasing business which might be a very important factor, 
as it allows a business to buy the stock, but pay for it at a later date, ideally after the business 
has had the opportunity to sell it. 
• Customer expectations: some customers may be less worried about price compared to quality. 
This will mean that suppliers chosen must maintain quality, even if the price is increased. An 
expensive restaurant cannot choose low quality low cost ingredients, as otherwise its reputation 
would suffer and it would lose customers. 


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 111  
Logistics 
Logistics is part of the procurement process. Logistics is the part of the supply chain that plans, 
implements and controls the distribution and storage of goods and services from the supplier until it 
arrives at the customer. Logistics is often seen as the transportation of raw materials and finished 
goods, but as with procurement it is a process not just a single activity. 
Logistics starts with suppliers and ends with the customer and can be illustrated as a flow of goods and 
information in one direction with money flowing in reverse. An example of a chain of logistics is 
illustrated below: 
  
Managing the logistics process is vital for a business to be successful. There are many consequences of 
failure in this distribution process and the key factors are summarised in the table: 
Factor Explanation 
Reputation If the supply chain breaks or slows, this can mean that products are delayed 
reaching the retailer, which may then be out of stock of some items. This will affect 
sales now and also potentially in the long term, particularly if this becomes a 
persistent problem and the business gains a reputation for being unreliable. 
In manufacturing, on time delivery can be even more critical, as a missing part 
might hold up the whole production process.  
Suppliers who cannot deliver effective logistics will gain a poor reputation and are 
unlikely to get repeat contracts. 
Cost There are many options in the logistics process. Which method or methods of 
transport should be used? Should the raw materials be bought directly from the 
producer – or through an intermediary, such as a retailer? Clearly expected timings 
must be met, but if the cost of the logistics is too high then competitors will have 
lower costs and therefore potentially cheaper prices. 
Customer 
satisfaction 
If the products arrive with the customer at the time and in the condition expected, 
given the price paid, then the customer will be happy. If the customer is happy, 
then he/she may be prepared to tell others and order again. With the use of digital 
technology today, customers increasingly receive communication updating them 
on the status of any order, which helps to manage their expectations in terms of 
delivery status and exact timings. 



===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 112  
Managing quality 
If a business is to be successful it must have satisfied customers. In order for customers to be satisfied, 
they must have received a good or service that matches their expectations of quality, taking into 
account the price they have paid.  
A good definition of quality is: 
“Quality is about meeting the needs and expectations of customers” 
Customers want quality that is appropriate to the price that they are prepared to pay and the level of 
competition in the market.  
Key aspects of quality for the customer include: 
• Good design – looks and style 
• Good functionality – it does the job well 
• Reliable – acceptable level of breakdowns or failure 
• Consistency 
• Durable – lasts as long as it should 
• Good after sales service 
• Value for money 
“Value for money” is especially important, because in most markets there is room for products of 
different overall levels of quality and the customer must be satisfied that the price fairly reflects the 
quality.  
Some goods and services are marketed as “basic”, having none of the extra features and benefits of 
more expensive alternatives. Good examples would be budget airlines and low cost supermarkets. Even 
though they may be “low quality” in terms of style or features, these products can still give good value 
for money given their expected level of quality. 
For the firm, good design is also fundamental, so that the product can be produced efficiently, reliably 
and at the lowest possible cost. 
However, it is important to remember that: 
• Quality is often a matter of personal opinion and what is an acceptable level of quality will vary 
from one individual to another 
• Not all aspects of quality can be measured. A firm’s name or reputation can be a very important 
indicator of quality, even though it is hard to measure. 
• Quality standards are always changing as improved technology, better materials, different 
manufacturing techniques and new competitors come to light 
Consequences of poor quality can be very damaging for a business. There will however, be costs to the 
businesses in providing and ensuring quality that is consistently in line with customer expectations.  
Approaches to managing quality 
Achieving high quality does not happen by accident. The production process must be properly managed 
to achieve quality standards. Quality management is concerned with controlling activities with the aim 


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 113  
of ensuring that goods and services are fit for their purpose and meet their specifications. There are two 
main methods of managing quality in a business: 
Quality control 
Historically quality control was the main method used to ensure quality standards. This was particularly 
used in manufacturing and was based on checking a sample or all goods at the end of the production 
process, to see whether they met the required standard. If they did not, they were rejected and then 
scrapped or the faults were corrected. This does protect the standard of goods to some extent, but it is 
an expensive and wasteful method. Employees may be careless, as they know work will be corrected.  
The alternative method of quality assurance puts the customer first and seeks to ensure that they 
receive the quality of goods or service that is in line with their expectations.  
Quality assurance 
Quality assurance aims to develop a quality culture throughout the firm using approaches such as total 
quality management (TQM). Every employee and each part of the production process has a target of 
“right first time” or zero defects. Business can gain an award (ISO9001) to show that they are effective 
in quality management. 
In quality assurance there is more emphasis on employee responsibility to get things right, rather than 
checking by inspectors.  
The process starts from receiving raw materials which are checked for quality, before they are used, and 
continues throughout the production process. This method even includes the administration of the 
business. It may also involve meetings of management and staff, called quality circles, where 
improvements to quality are suggested and management then make a decision as to whether to 
implement the ideas generated. 
Advantages of quality assurance are: 
 Costs are reduced because there is less wastage and re-working of faulty products, as the 
product is checked at every stage 
 It can help improve worker motivation, as workers have more ownership and recognition for 
their work 
 It can help break down “us and them” barriers between workers and managers, as it eliminates 
the feeling of being checked up on, as staff are empowered to make decisions about quality 
 With all staff responsible for quality, this can help the firm gain marketing advantages arising 
from its consistent level of quality 
Benefits of managing quality 
Maintaining and managing quality standards can benefit a business in a number of ways: 
 Customer loyalty – customers return, make repeat purchases and recommend the good or 
service to others, increasing sales further 
 Strong brand image and reputation for quality, attracting new customers 
 As the good or service is seen as being of good quality, it may command a higher price 
 Fewer returns, product recalls and replacements, leading to reduced costs and increased 
efficiency 
 The attraction and retention of good staff, who want to work for a business that provides quality 
goods and services 


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 114  
 Developing initiatives and changing the way a business operates, through implementing quality 
assurance methods, will help to lower inspection costs, as quality is the responsibility of 
everyone in the organisation and is embedded throughout the organisation 
These points can each help give the business a competitive advantage and support the marketing of a 
business. Customers are likely to choose to buy from businesses with a good quality reputation, even if 
they are more expensive. However, firms have to work hard to maintain and improve their reputation 
for quality, which can easily be damaged by a news story about a quality failure.  
Drawbacks/costs to a business of poor quality 
Poor quality will result in additional costs for a business: 
 Lost customers – it is very difficult and expensive to attract new customers, if old customers are 
lost 
 Legal action might be taken against the business, if its goods or services are not of the required 
standard 
 Cost of reworking or remaking products that are faulty or not up to the required standard 
 Costs of replacements or refunds 
Whichever method of improving or maintaining quality a business chooses to adopt, it will have a cost. 
A business would have to balance these costs against the benefits, to ensure the quality method chosen 
is appropriate to the business needs. These include: 
• Costs of inspection and checking for quality control 
• Cost of training for implementing quality assurance; this may involve a change in working 
practices in the organisation and therefore will require a significant investment in training for all 
staff, to ensure that quality standards are consistently met by the business 
• Cost of time for quality circle meetings and implementing initiatives that arise from such 
meetings 
The sales process and customer service 
Sales is the final part of the distribution process and is extremely important, as this is how the business 
generates revenue. Customer service can be defined as the methods used by a business to look after its 
current and futures customers. If a business wants customers to return and to gain and maintain a good 
reputation, it will need to provide good customer service.  
Sales process 
This can be broken down into stages, from attracting a customer’s attention, through to concluding the 
sale. Although this is normally seen as being operated by a sales person, the same process also applies 
to telephone sales and e-sales where the “selling” is undertaken through a website. In order for the 
process to be successful, there are certain key factors that must be addressed: 
Product knowledge – sales people must have strong knowledge about the good or service they are 
selling. If they do not then the customer will not have confidence in what they are buying and if they 
make false statements then consumer protection law might apply. 
Customer engagement – once a potential customer shows an interest in a product then the sales 
process must engage them in providing information about what it is they are interested in and showing 
them how purchasing the item will benefit them. This process might well start with establishing what 
exactly the customer is looking for, so options can be presented. 


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 115  
Speed and efficiency of service – consumers are busy people. They do not expect to wait too long to be 
engaged in a sales conversation, unless the product is in very high demand. In many cases there will be 
competitors, which could be easier or faster to purchase from. Amazon have set, as a priority, a high 
speed selling process. 
Concluding the sale – there must be appropriate methods for agreeing on the sale. This might be 
signing a contract or clicking an online button linked to a credit card payment. In a shop, there may be 
different payment options that are acceptable – and some that are not. These must meet the business 
and customer requirements. 
Post-sales service – a good sales process will follow up a purchase to see if everything is “OK” and 
determine how things could be improved. As well as the customer feeling their opinion is valued, it 
means the business can improve its selling process.  
Response to customer feedback – having gathered feedback from customers then the business should 
learn from it and make changes if appropriate. However, changes may not be appropriate in some 
cases, as all customers would like their purchases to be cheaper! Nevertheless, changes could be made 
to the product and how it is promoted, as well as to the selling process.  
The benefits of getting the sales process right are partly immediate, as more sales are made. Some retail 
businesses set targets for their managers that every person who visits the store should leave having 
bought something. Many tourist destinations, including airport duty free shops, will direct all visitors 
through the shopping area to encourage unplanned sales. Benefits are also long term, satisfied 
customers will come again and they will tell their friends which will generate sales. Dis-satisfied 
customers however, will tell far more people, which may damage a firm’s reputation in the longer term. 
Therefore, getting the sales process right is absolutely critical, particularly when a business is operating 
in a hugely competitive market where lots of substitute products exist. 
The importance of customer service 
Customer service can now be applied to the selling process. The following are usually considered to be 
essential in achieving happy customers: 
 The good or service must meet customer needs and wants i.e. it must be of the expected 
quality. It should also be reliable and safe. Delivery is increasingly important as more shopping 
takes place on line and facilities such as free delivery, choosing time slots and click and collect 
are all valued by customers. 
 Product information is also important. The legal requirements must be met, for example in 
terms of product description in food and clothing. Customers expect goods and services to be 
accurately described. This is especially important for online sales. Product information can also 
include product reviews. 
 Sales and promotional activities need to create a positive experience for the customer. The 
attitudes of employees who engage with customers should be positive and professional. 
 Pre and post-sales service provided should be positive and appropriate, for example user 
training, helplines and servicing. Customers often need reassurance after they have bought 
something that they have made the right choice or they may need help in using a product 
properly. Employees will need to be well trained, not just in terms of product knowledge, but 
also how and when they communicate with customers. Follow up communication can also 
provide valuable market research information as well as reassuring the customer about their 
purchase. 
Benefits of good customer service 


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 116  
The potential benefits to the firm from providing a consistently high level of customer service include: 
 Increased sales – satisfied customers are also more likely to try out other goods/services 
produced or provided by the same business  
 Customer loyalty – more likely to be a source of repeat business and to recommend the 
business to friends and family, creating new customers 
 Enhanced public image – this helps build a brand and provides protection if there is a slip-up in 
customer service 
 More effective workforce – satisfied customers help create a positive working environment. 
Employees who deliver good customer service receive their customers’ appreciation, rather than 
complaints, and are further motivated to offer good customer service 
 Cheaper costs – good customer service will reduce the number of complaints and refunds, which 
will save the business costs in providing expensive customer service departments 
Dangers in providing poor customer service  
Recent research has highlighted the dangers to a business of providing poor customer service i.e. the 
cost of customer dissatisfaction: 
 As satisfaction levels drop, loyalty drops faster: there is a significant drop in loyalty between 
customers who say they are “very satisfied” and “somewhat satisfied” - sometimes as much as 
50%. A dangerous policy in many organisations is to ignore this fact and to just try and improve 
their combined score, rather than trying to increase the number of “very satisfied” customers. 
 Problems drive customers away: there is typically a 25% drop in loyalty amongst customers who 
experience a problem. In revenue terms, this can be the equivalent of losing some, or all, of the 
revenue from one in every four customers who have experienced a problem. 
 More customers have problems than you think: research shows that as many as 50% of an 
organisation’s customers may actually be experiencing problems at any one time. Only 5% of 
those experiencing a problem may complain to the firm’s complaints or customer services 
department.  Therefore, as many as 95% of customers who experience a problem may say 
nothing to the business at all! 
 Unhappy customers spread the word: research confirms that on average customers tell twice as 
many people about a bad experience than they do about a good one. This means, depending on 
the industry, between 5 and 10 people are told about a bad experience. Today, negative word-
of-mouth happens much quicker and to a much greater scale, due to use of the internet and the 
power of social networks. 
Effective customer service and response pays: research also confirms the importance of effectively 
responding to customers when they do complain. Customers can be very demanding but, with an 
effective response, it is still possible to obtain a more loyal customer afterwards, than you had before 
they experienced the problem! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 117
