2.4 Making financial decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business calculations Gross profit and net profit 
Calculation and interpretation of financial data 
Understanding business 
performance 
Using and interpreting quantitative data 
Use and limitations of financial data 
 
Business calculations 
Every business and every entrepreneur needs an understanding of the financial performance of the 
business they are involved in. There is a need to understand financial terms and also to be able 
understand and interpret financial data. Businesses also need to be able to make financial calculations, 
for example measuring the financial outcome of possible investment opportunities. 
The basic financial terms were considered in Theme 1 in terms of costs, revenue and profit. In this 
section, we will consider profit calculations in more detail. 
Profit can be measured and calculated as gross profit and net profit. Gross profit is the amount the 
business makes from its actual business operation. From gross profit the business has to then pay for its 
expenses, which will leave it with its net profit. This is the figure that shows how well the business is 
really doing.  
The formula for gross profit and net profit are as follows: 
GROSS PROFIT = SALES REVENUE - COST OF SALES 
NET PROFIT = GROSS PROFIT - OTHER OPERATING COSTS AND INTEREST 
 
Here are two examples which illustrate these formulae in action: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 118  
 
 Sales Cost of Sales Gross profit Expenses 
and interest 
Net profit (or 
loss) 
Business A £100,000 £40,000 £60,000 £35,000 £25,000 
(profit) 
Business B £100,000 £70,000 £30,000 £40,000 £10,000 (loss) 
 Total sales greater than total costs 
Total costs greater than total sales 
Total sales = total costs 
= Net profit 
= Loss 
= Break-even 
 
Whatever the result, profit, loss or breaking even a business will always need to review its performance 
and look at how it might be improved. Can costs be decreased? If so, how… and by when? Can revenue 
be increased? Should the price stay the same? Can more be sold? Is there a need for further investment 
to decrease costs or increase revenue? 
Profitability ratios 
The accounts of a business can be used to tell us how much profit a business has made in a period.  But, 
how can a business tell if that level of profit shows good business performance or not?  One way to 
judge how “profitable” a business is to calculate profitability ratios.  There are two main profitability 
ratios: 
• Gross profit margin 
• Net profit margin 
Let’s look at how they are calculated and used. 
Gross profit margin % 
This ratio compares the gross profit earned in a period with the revenues of that period. It is calculated 
using this formula: 
 
The table shows some examples of this calculation: 
Business A B C 
 
Revenue £ 200,000 500,000 1,000,000 



===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 119  
Cost of sales £ 100,000 300,000 750,000 
Gross profit £ 100,000 200,000 250,000 
 
Gross profit margin 50% 40% 25% 
In the table, it can be seen that Business C makes the highest gross profit of £250,000.  However, this is 
because it has a much higher revenue than Businesses A or B.  In terms of gross profit relative to 
revenues, Business A has the highest gross profit margin of 50%, followed by Business B of 40%.   
The gross profit margin shows that Business A makes a gross profit of £0.50 for each £1 of revenue.  
That is twice the level of Business C, which only makes a gross profit of £0.25 for each £1 of revenue. 
Why might the gross profit margin of these three businesses vary so much? Well, they might operate in 
different industries? If they are in the same industry, then Business C might be less efficient than the 
other two or its selling price might be much lower. A high gross profit margin will mean that the 
business is providing high value added. Price of cups of tea and coffee at roadside cafes are good 
examples of items with very high gross profit margins. 
Net profit margin % 
Net profit is what is left after all the costs, expenses and interest of a business have been taken from its 
sales revenue.  The net profit margin compares the net profit earned in a period with the revenues of 
that period. It is calculated using this formula: 
 
    Net                     Net Profit 
    Profit           =                               x 100 
    Margin                Revenue 
 
Look at the following example: 
Monthly net profit for January 2016 £’000 
Sales  400 
Cost of sales 200 
Gross profit  200 
Other operating expenses/interest 150 
NET PROFIT   50 
 
Net profit margin 12.5% 
 
In the profit statement above, the business has made a net profit of £50,000.  The net profit is 
calculated by subtracting all the business expenses/overheads and interest, totalling £150,000, from the 


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 120  
gross profit of £200,000.  In the period, the business has made a net profit margin of 12.5%.  That 
means that it has converted 12.5% or 12.5p of each pound of sales into net profit! 
The net profit margin is the most significant out of the two profitability ratios, as it shows a business: 
• How effectively a business turns its sales into profit 
• How efficiently a business is run, in particular, is it keeping its operating costs as low as it can? 
• Whether a business has been able to “add value” throughout the production process i.e. a 
business with a high net profit margin must be doing something right! 
On its own, the net profit margin is useful information.  However, it is even more useful if comparisons 
can be made between: 
• changes in net profit margin over time, for example month by month or comparing different 
years 
• net profit margins of competitors in the same market 
 
Look at this example: 
Example  Company A 
£’000 
Company B 
£’000 
Company C 
£’000 
Sales  150 250 500 
Net profit  50 25 125 
Net profit margin  33% 10% 25% 
 
Looking at the financial information given in the example, it can be seen that: 
• Company A makes a higher net profit than Company B, even though its sales are lower. It has a 
higher net profit margin and is clearly controlling its expenses, overheads and cost of sales well 
compared to the other two businesses. 
 
Investment ratio – average rate of return (ARR) 
A business will always be looking to improve its performance and its profitability. Most methods of 
achieving these improvements will involve investment. An investment is where a sum of money, known 
as capital, is spent today in order to get a benefit in the future. There are many different reasons for 
investment. These include growth of the business, replacing worn out machinery or modernisation and 
mechanisation.  
In order to work out whether the investment is worth taking, there are various calculations a business 
can make based on the cost of the project and the future returns it will provide. One of these is known 
as the average rate of return. 
Average rate of return (ARR) 
Average rate of return is a simple method of calculating whether a project is worthwhile. It calculates 
the annual average return for a project expressed as a percentage. This can be compared with other 
projects on which the money could be spent or the interest it could earn if saved. It can also be 


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 121  
compared with the cost of borrowing money to fund the project, if the business does not have any 
savings or retained profit that it can use. 
The formula for the average rate of return or ARR is: 
 
ARR (%) = Average annual profit (total profit from the investment ÷ number of years) x 100 
        Initial cost of the investment  
    
 
For example a fast food business could expand to operate a delivery service. This would mean buying a 
van for £30,000. The van would last 5 years and the business has calculated that it would make an extra 
profit of £22,500 during the 5 years.  
ARR (%) = (£22,500 ÷ 5) x 100 = £4,500 x 100 = 15% 
         £30,000      £30,000       
Depending on how reliable the firm’s profit estimates are, this would be quite a good return even if the 
business has to borrow money to fund the investment. 
ARR is often used to compare different projects to see which one has the highest return. The 
percentage financial return is not, however, the only factor to be considered. In comparing projects 
other factors such as risk, i.e. how likely the project is to succeed, must also be taken into account. The 
initial cost is also relevant as if this is too much, however high the ARR is, the project may not be 
affordable for the business. 
Understanding business performance 
As well as financial data, there are other sources of quantitative information that a business can find 
and use to help it with effective and accurate decision making. This data can be displayed in tables, 
graphs or charts.  
 
Marketing is one particular area where quantitative business data is commonly found, for example 
market research and sales data. Operations and human resources will also generate quantitative data in 
areas such as productivity, costs and staff retention rates. It should also be remembered that the 
business and its decisions are influenced by the external environment, market data (is the market 
growing or declining) and information about the economy, such as whether the economy is booming, if 
interest rates are set to rise etc. All this information will be invaluable to help the business with 
effective decision making. 
Data presentation and analysis 
If a business gathers data first hand, through primary research, it will need to be presented in a way that 
is easy to understand and interpret for the key decision makers of the business. This will involve 
combining and presenting the data into a format that will enable easy analysis. This may also be the 
case with regard to secondary data, dependent on the type of data that has been gathered. 
Quantitative data is much easier to present compared to qualitative responses, which are often difficult 
to combine and summarise. 


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 122  
There are many examples of data presentation which allow, for example, market research results to be 
clearly seen.  These include tally charts, bar charts, pie charts, line charts, pictograms and tables of data. 
In other cases, data can be combined in order to provide average scores to a particular question asked.  
 
 
Use of computers has made presentation of data very easy and some programmes will allow data to be 
recorded, totalled and displayed. In some cases this can be done automatically direct, for example, from 
questionnaire responses.  
Data analysis and interpretation is also undertaken by firms, from data presentation. This could mean 
separating out responses for different groups of people, for example male and female. This can also be 
displayed using data presentation techniques. For example the average price people are willing to pay 
for a haircut may be £20, but the average for women is £30 and the average for men is £10. Therefore, 
a new hairdressing business would not want to charge £20 to everyone and would have a separate price 
list for men and women. 
Market  and marketing data 
One of the objectives of the business is often to increase market share. This is normally measured as the 
sales of the business compared to the total market sales expressed as a percentage. Alongside this 
objective, the market itself might be growing (or declining) so it is possible to have higher sales and a 
lower market share if the market is growing faster than the sales of a business.  
• Market information is generally available through secondary data for the industry concerned and 
includes population information such as age distribution, income levels and employment and 
unemployment information. 
• Marketing data can be used to measure the effectiveness of the marketing strategy or marketing 
plans of a business. If a business spends money on advertising, it will want to know whether the 
awareness and the sales of the product increase. If they introduce a sales promotion has the 
increase in sales made it worthwhile? 
An example of sales of a business, Easy Store, compared to the total market is given in the table: 
 2013 2014 2015 2016 
Easy Store sales £2m £3m £4m £3.5m 
Total market sales £20m £24m £36m £28m 
Easy Store  
% market share 10% 12.5% 11.1% 12.5% 
The data shows that:  
• Market size has increased from 2013 to 2015. It then decreases between 2015 and 2016 
• In 2014, Easy Store’s sales and market share had increased compared to 2013 



===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 123  
• In 2015, Easy Store’s sales had again increased, but the market size had increased faster, 
therefore its market share had decreased compared to the year before 
• In 2016, Easy Store’s sales decreased, but because the market size had decreased faster than 
Easy Store sales, its market share increased 
Based on this information the business will consider what actions it should take. Often the market size is 
changing through factors outside of the business’s control. Therefore a firm’s market share percentage 
will better show how well the business is performing in relation to the external market conditions it 
faces. If the total market size is falling, a business might decide to cut costs to maintain profit levels. It 
also might change the nature of the products it sells or the price it charges for its products. 
Limitations of financial information 
As seen with the financial performance data considered earlier, care must be taken when interpreting 
the data. For example, trying to compare the efficiency of businesses using sales figures will not be valid 
unless there is reference to productivity i.e. the amount of work produced per employee or how high 
the sales are of a business as a percentage of its costs.  
There are many other limitations in using data, particularly financial data: 
Accuracy – does the data represent the actual data that was collected? Are there any results included 
that have been guessed or made up? 
Representative – is this year’s financial data useful to compare with previous years? There may be new 
products or new markets that have been targeted or new stores opened, which would show more sales, 
but equally higher costs. Data for seasonal products will also need to be interpreted correctly as, for 
example, ice cream sales always go up in the summer. 
Out of date – all data is out of date – the question is by how much and is it still of use? Sales figures will 
refer to last month, last quarter or even last year. Cost data will be similarly historic. Sometimes the 
time, effort and cost of collecting and analysing the data too regularly may not be worthwhile, as it will 
still not necessarily be an accurate guide as to present and future performance. 
Qualitative data may be needed – Most data collected and analysed on a regular basis is quantitative. 
This will be limiting however. Profits and sales figures may indicate that the launch of a new product has 
been successful. However, it could be that the customers have tried the product once, but do not like 
certain features of a new model or product and have no intention of buying it again or are only buying 
the product because there is no alternative. The business can and therefore should support the 
quantitative data with some in depth qualitative data. This can ask questions about attitudes and values 
and the combined results will provide a much more reliable basis for management decisions. 
It should be remembered that all data, marketing data, financial data, including ratios, operations data 
and human resources data are only the tools for the decisions. They do not make the decisions – the 
managers will do that. Managers will take into account the data and all the circumstances faced by the 
business including internal and external factors and the most important stakeholder objectives when 
making decisions, to ensure hopefully they are making the right ones! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 124
