

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
COURSE COMPANION
EDEXCEL GCSE 
BUSINESS (9-1)
.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  
Comprehensive Study Notes for Theme 1 and Theme 2 of 
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1)


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
CONTENTS 
THEME 1 – INVESTIGATING SMALL BUSINESS 3 
1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship 3 
Topic overview 3 
Dynamic nature of business 3 
Risk and reward 6 
Role of Business Enterprise 9 
1.2 Spotting a business opportunity 12 
Customer needs 12 
Market research 13 
Market segmentation 18 
The Competitive Environment 21 
1.3 - Putting a Business Idea Into Practice 23 
Business aims and objectives 23 
Business revenues, costs and profits 26 
Revenue and Profit 28 
Cash and cash-flow 35 
Sources of business finance 39 
1.4 - Making the Business Effective 44 
Business organisation 44 
Business location 49 
Marketing mix 51 
Business plans 52 
1.5 - Understanding External Influences on a Business 54 
Business stakeholders 54 
Technology and business 57 
Legislation and Business 62 
The economy and business 65 
The importance of external influences 69 
THEME 2 – BUILDING A BUSINESS 71 
2.1 Growing the Business 71 
Business Growth 71 
Changes in business aims and objectives 79 
Globalisation 80 
Benefits 81 
Drawbacks 81 
Ethics, the environment and business 84 
2.2 Making marketing decisions 89 
Product 89 
Promotion 93 
Place 98 
2.3 Making Operational Decisions 103 
Business operations 103 
Working with suppliers 106 
Managing quality 112 
The sales process and customer service 114 
2.4 Making financial decisions 117 


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 2  
Business calculations 117 
Understanding business performance 121 
2.5 Human Resource Decisions 124 
Organisational structures 124 
Effective recruitment 133 
Effective training and development 138 
Motivation 140 
  


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 3  
Theme 1 – Investigating Small Business 
1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which an 
enterprise and an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business 
environment and how this might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this sections 
relationship with the other areas in this theme and how these areas may impact on business decision-
making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
The dynamic nature of 
business 
New business ideas and their sources 
Adapting existing ideas 
Changes in technology  
Changes in customer requirements 
Risk and reward Types and impact of business risks 
Types and impact of business rewards 
The role of business 
enterprise 
The role of enterprise in business activity 
Production of goods and services 
Meeting customer needs 
Adding value  
The role of the entrepreneur 
 
Dynamic nature of business 
Where do business ideas come from?  In practice, there are many ways in which a business opportunity 
and idea is first spotted.   
Firstly, the world in which we live in is always rapidly changing and therefore businesses are constantly 
faced with change. These changes include new legislation, changes in the economy, new technology, 
which may result in some goods and services becoming obsolete, political events and even the weather. 
Consumer tastes will change as new fashions arise and as new ideas and developments come along. 
Successful businesses will come up with new ideas, adapt existing products and change their location 
and their staff as different circumstances arise.  Change is a massive opportunity! However, it is also a 
considerable threat to those businesses that ignore the changes that are taking place in the market. 
Businesses should avoid standing still, as those that try to will generally end up failing! 
Some of the key changes that give rise to new ideas are summarised below:  
  


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 4  
 
Type of change: Explanation: 
New technology 
 
Ideas for new products might come about due to advances in technology. 
Computers, smartphones, digital cameras and so on, are all examples of 
products where new technology is constantly allowing new products to be 
developed and launched for sale. 
Change in consumer 
wants 
 
Fashions and consumer tastes are always changing. As well as the more 
obvious areas of clothing, designs will also change in areas such as cars, 
furniture, buildings and many more consumer goods. There are also new 
trends in terms of healthy eating, fitness and specialist types of holidays. 
Products and services 
becoming obsolete 
Over time products become outdated as new products are developed, which 
is often linked to changes in technology. Other reasons for products 
becoming obsolete are changes in the economy, for example increased 
wealth will decrease demand for inferior products, such as supermarket 
value products and bus travel. 
Original ideas 
One of the key characteristics of many entrepreneurs is their creativity. Entrepreneurs will often 
produce many original ideas for new goods and services. In many cases, these will not prove practical or 
profitable to develop on a larger scale and take to market! Some ideas however, will be worth pursuing. 
At this point, the entrepreneur will undertake research and development of the idea. 
Adapting existing products 
Many new products are developed from existing goods or services, whereby the entrepreneur thinks of 
a way of improving them. Consider any technology based product, such as the computer or the mobile 
phone, and it is clear how much and how quickly the product has been adapted and developed in recent 
years. 
Business experience 
Many ideas for successful businesses come from people who have experience of working in a particular 
market or industry.  For a start-up business, there are several advantages of applying this experience to 
a new business idea: 
 Better and more detailed understanding of what customers want 
 Knowledge of competitors, pricing, suppliers etc. 
 Less need for start-up market research 
 Entrepreneur is able to make more realistic assumptions in the business plan about sales, costs 
etc. 
 The entrepreneur may have contacts in the industry, who might then become the first 
customers of the start-up! 


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 5  
All of the above help the business planning process and it can be argued that they reduce the risk of 
starting up a business.  
On the other hand, it can be argued that “familiarity breeds contempt”.  In other words, detailed 
experience of an industry means that the budding entrepreneur does not have a fresh view.  Someone 
who is new to a market may be able to exploit approaches that have worked in other industries, to 
make an impact with their idea. 
Personal experience 
Many ideas come to entrepreneurs from their day-to-day dealings in life or from their hobbies and 
interests. 
For some of us, frustrating or bad experiences are a source of irritation.  For the entrepreneur, they 
might suggest a business opportunity.   
It is often said that one of the best ways to spot a business opportunity is to look for examples of poor 
customer service (complaints, product returns, persistent queues etc).  Such examples suggest that 
there is an opportunity to do something better, quicker or cheaper than the existing offer! 
Hobbies and interests are also a rich source of business ideas, although an entrepreneur would have to 
be careful to avoid assuming that, just because they may have a passion for collecting “rare can 
openers”, there is a ready market from people with similar interests!  Many people have tried to turn 
their hobby into a business and found that it generates only a small contribution to household income 
and therefore it would not prove to be a sustainable future business for the entrepreneur. 
Observation 
Simply observing what happens on a day to day basis can be a good way of spotting an idea.  Often an 
idea will be launched in another country that has not yet been tried in other similar economies.  For 
example, successful entrepreneur Stephen Waring, fortunately attended a wedding in the USA and by 
luck sat next to someone who ran a household service business, treating lawns.  After some brief 
market research, Stephen found out that there was no similar business in the UK, so he launched one in 
1986.  Green Thumb has since become a hugely successful franchise business providing lawn care and 
grass maintenance for nearly 500,000 houses in the UK.  
It is worth looking at other examples of successful business start-ups, in order to appreciate the wide 
and diverse range of sources of ideas that these firms are built upon.  Here are some good ones: 
Business Entrepreneur Where the Idea Came From 
Propercorn Casa Stavrou 
and Ryan Kohn 
Casa, recognised that consumers tastes were changing.  Consumers 
were looking for healthier alternatives to their favourite snack 
foods. Demand for organic, low sugar, low fat snacks, crisps and 
biscuits was rising.   With the help of her best friend, Ryan, they 
decided to create a snack that they felt was satisfying, delicious and 
healthy.  Propercorn, was born and is now sold in 11 countries and 
stocked in major supermarkets 
King of Shaves Will King Will found traditional wet-shaving painful, due to his sensitive skin.  
His girlfriend suggested using oil to smooth the process.  An oil-
based solution to shaving was developed and is now a world leader. 


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 6  
Mallzee Cally Russell Cally was frustrated with the process of shopping online for clothes.  
He felt it was time consuming having to visit different sites to 
source his favourite brands.  He create an app – Mallzee. The 
personalised shopping app allows shoppers to access their 
favourite stores within one app, making it simpler and easier to buy 
clothes online. 
Superjam Fraser Doherty Fraser turned his grandmother’s recipe for sugar-free jams into a 
best-selling grocery brand. 
What makes a good business idea? 
Having an idea for a business is the easy bit! It is much harder to work out whether the idea has 
potential and can be turned into a viable business idea. 
Good business ideas therefore, tend to have one or more of the following characteristics: 
 They solve a problem 
 Offer a cheaper or better way of doing something than existing goods or services 
 Are simple and practicable 
 Can be developed and delivered to the market quickly 
 Have a clear focus on meeting the needs of the target customer 
 Anticipate market trends and exploit growth opportunities 
 
Risk and reward 
Risk can mean several things: 
• the chance of loss or damage 
• the probability that something goes wrong, leading to a loss 
• when a hoped-for outcome does not happen 
If setting up a new business was risk-free i.e. guaranteed to succeed, then we would all do it! The bad 
news for entrepreneurs is that investing in a start-up business is highly risky. 
What is the risk?  The main risk is that the business will fail and that the entrepreneur will lose his/her 
investment.  In the case of a sole trader or partnership, the entrepreneur may also end up personally 
liable for the debts of the failed business (an important reason why many start-ups select private 
limited companies as their chosen form of business organisation).  
Prior to complete failure, the business may also struggle for customers and to generate sufficient 
revenue to cover costs initially or on an ongoing basis. This may leave the entrepreneur with a lack of 
security – will he/she have enough funds to continue to trade successfully in the future, without being 
reliant on other sources of finance to keep the firm going? Will the entrepreneur have enough money to 
pay themselves a decent wage, to maintain his/her desired standard of living? 
Another risk is that a failed business may leave the entrepreneur struggling to finance another business 
or successfully be appointed for a job in someone else’s firm. This may be the result of the entrepreneur 
finding it difficult to face and accept the overall failure itself.  There is no reason why people should be 
ashamed of failing in business, but in reality many are. 


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 7  
Taken together, it can be seen why these risks are often the reason why an entrepreneur continues to 
keep a business going, even when the business is struggling badly. When you are “risking it all” then you 
put all your effort into making the business a success! 
Learning the lessons of failure 
A good way of thinking about the risks being taken, is to consider why start-up and small businesses fail.  
If an entrepreneur can learn from and avoid these mistakes, then any new business that is set up has a 
greater chance of survival and success. 
Here are the main reasons why businesses fail: 
Poor management Plain and simple. Planning is inadequate leading to poor decision-making, costs 
are not kept under control, business owners or management do not understand 
their market and customers well enough and/or a poor quality product is provided 
Poor market 
research 
In starting a business or keeping an existing business successful, there is a need to 
undertake market research. This will need to be reliable enough to predict future 
sales. It is often not carried out as it is too expensive or, if it is completed, the data 
is frequently out of date or not fully relevant 
Sales lower than 
expected 
It is very easy to over-estimate the sales that will be achieved by a start-up.  The 
business plan can be over-optimistic about the price that customers will accept 
and the volumes they will buy 
Start-up costs too 
high 
Another common weakness of start-up business planning.  Sometimes costs are 
simply missed out altogether or alternatively the amounts are under-estimated.  
This is a big concern at the start-up stage, where finance is limited. A delayed 
product launch or store opening may be the cause of start-up costs being higher 
than expected 
Unexpected 
shocks 
These can come in various forms, for example flash floods that hit different places 
in the UK from time to time, a new competitor entering the market, a global 
recession, a change in government and the UK leaving the EU (BREXIT) 
Too reliant on a 
small number of 
customers 
A start-up that is too reliant on one or a few customers is at greater risk of failure 
than one which has a broader, more diverse customer base.  If the customer 
relationship breaks down and/or the customer stops buying products from the 
business, then it puts the business at risk  
Poor quality This is linked to poor management.  Persistent poor quality goods or services will 
ultimately kill a business, as rival businesses will produce superior products that 
customers will undoubtedly prefer 
By identifying the cause of failure, this allows a business owner to come up with solutions. Better still it 
allows a business to improve its planning, so that in the future it can minimise its risk and prevent it 
happening again – if it is not too late! 
Reducing risk 
There are many ways of reducing risk in a new or small business. Some of the key ones are as follows: 
• Plan – for example prepare a realistic business plan 
• Research – market research should be valid, up to date and specific to the business’s needs 
• Be cautious –  the business should avoid growing too fast 


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 8  
• Finance with care  – shares and retained profits are safer than loans, as these sources of finance 
do not need to be paid back 
• Avoid costs – premises and staff are expensive 
• Protect – a company with limited liability will protect investors 
• Monitor and review – look back and look forward, ensure the business is on track to where it 
should be; this can be achieved by monitoring finances and reviewing regularly the aims and the 
objectives of the business to assess progress 
Rewards from enterprise 
As well as risks, there are also many rewards for being in business. For some entrepreneurs, many of 
these arise from achieving their own personal objectives. These include:   
• a personal sense of satisfaction of opening and running a successful business 
• building something from scratch i.e. their own enterprise 
• being in full control and therefore having the independence and ability to make all the decisions 
• making that first sale! 
• opening in a new location 
• employing more people 
• getting an industry award or receiving some good publicity 
• getting great feedback from customers 
• having social objectives for society as a whole e.g. helping others and attempting to meet a 
social need  
These are the kind of non-financial rewards that give entrepreneurs a “buzz”. 
However, ultimately, it is the financial rewards of making profit that justify the effort and make taking 
the risk worthwhile. Famous entrepreneurs, such as Sir Richard Branson (Virgin), Sir Alan Sugar 
(Amstrad), James Dyson and  Charles Dunstone (Carphone Warehouse), have all built very successful 
businesses that are either worth or have been sold for millions of pounds.  
Sarah Willingham, who has appeared as one of the “Dragons” on Dragons Den, is another example of a 
successful entrepreneur. Sarah worked in the restaurant industry from the age of 13 and has now 
managed some of the world’s most successful restaurants, including launching Pizza Express in Asia and 
Planet Hollywood in Paris.  
In 2004, she saw the opportunity to turn a failing chain of six Indian restaurants into a successful 
investment. Sarah raised enough finance to buy “The Bombay Bicycle Club” which she sold three years 
later for well over a million pounds, having made it into the largest and most successful Indian 
restaurant chain in the UK. 
There is a strong tradition of entrepreneurs who have built and sold one business for a substantial 
amount of money, to go on to build other successful businesses.  They never lose the entrepreneurial 
buzz! 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 9  
Role of Business Enterprise 
The term “enterprise” has two common meanings. 
Firstly, an enterprise is simply another name for a business.  You will often come across the use of the 
word when reading about start-ups and other businesses…“Richard Branson’s enterprise” or “Julie set 
up her successful enterprise after leaving teaching”. 
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the word enterprise describes the actions of someone who 
takes a risk by setting up, investing in and running a business.   
Someone who shows enterprise by setting up a business is called an “entrepreneur”.   
Purposes of enterprise 
The role of the enterprise will normally revolve around making a profit for the entrepreneur. There are 
a variety of ways that the enterprise can achieve this: 
Purpose of 
enterprise activity 
Explanation 
Producing goods 
and services 
An entrepreneur will organise the business operation and bring together the 
resources that are required to ensure that goods or services are produced 
efficiently and will reach the customer so that a profit can be made 
Meeting customer 
needs 
An enterprise should sell goods or services that meet a specific customer need. 
If an enterprise just produces a product because the entrepreneur knows how to 
make it, without demand being present in the market, the business will end up 
with unsold stock 
Adding value In order to make a profit, the enterprise will need to sell at a price that is higher 
than its costs. This is known as value added and can be increased in different 
ways such as: 
 Convenience: customers may be prepared to pay more for a service at 
home rather than having to go to the shops 
 Branding: if an enterprise can establish itself as being a good quality or 
reliable brand, then the business can charge more 
 Design: the use, appearance and cost of a product are all important 
factors and can add value to its production 
 Quality: customers will have an expectation of the quality of a product 
and the more a product meets or exceeds this, the more value will be 
added in its production 
 Unique selling point (USP): if a product is different to that of its 
competitors in some good way, then the enterprise has the possibility of 
charging a higher price because of this difference. This might be the 
name of the product or a particular feature that it possesses 
  


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 10  
What is an entrepreneur? 
There are many definitions of what is meant by an entrepreneur, but they tend to say the same thing, 
which is that an entrepreneur is… 
“someone who takes a calculated risk through starting a business.” 
An entrepreneur is someone who is enterprising. In other words they: 
• take the initiative and can organise resources to try and exploit a business opportunity 
• take time to understand and calculate the risks involved 
• make an investment, often of their own money, to set up the business 
• go ahead, despite the risk that the business venture might fail 
• are capable of making accurate business decisions  
An entrepreneur will have many different reasons for starting a business and these will vary between 
different entrepreneurs: 
Financial 
objectives 
 
Making a profit – this is achieved through creating more revenue than the costs 
involved in running the business. Alternatively a profit could be made from selling 
the business or business idea to another business for a lot of money. 
Investing money – some entrepreneurs have a sum of money, which they have 
gained through redundancy or inheritance, and they want it to provide a return 
to them i.e. they would like to use the money to make more money in the future. 
Non-financial 
objectives 
 
Work-life balance – entrepreneurs can have more choice over what work they do 
and when they do it. They can often run their business from home, giving them 
more freedom and flexibility. 
 
Skills and interests – entrepreneurs often have business ideas that are linked to 
their own skills or interests. This can be very motivating for the entrepreneur, as 
they will have a genuine passion for the business idea and therefore will be highly 
motivated to make the business succeed. 
 
Being their own boss – many entrepreneurs want to be independent to make 
their own decisions and not be part of a large organisation. Their current job 
might also be boring, causing them to be unhappy with their existing situation. 
In recent years the media has glamourised the challenge of starting and growing a business.  A quick 
search on Amazon.co.uk will display many books by entrepreneurs and other “business experts” 
describing “how I made my first million” etc. Television shows, such as Dragons Den and The 
Apprentice, have proved hugely popular by showing the challenges faced in setting up a business or 
gaining investment for a business idea. Entrepreneurs such as Lord Sugar, Sir Richard Branson and Sir 
James Dyson have earned enormous fortunes and provide inspiration for the next generation of 
budding business leaders. 
It is important, however, to realise that starting a business is rarely glamourous.  In fact it is nearly 
always very hard work.  For every success story, there are almost certainly many more business failures 
or businesses that do not meet the expectations of the people who set them up. 
Not surprisingly, much research has been done to examine the personality and other characteristics of 
successful entrepreneurs, to see if there is a guaranteed method or route to success.  You will find many 


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 11  
lists of “what is takes to be an entrepreneur”, but they tend to cover the same points.  The following is a 
summary of the key findings: 
What makes a good entrepreneur? 
Successful entrepreneurs tend to have many of the following characteristics and skills: 
• Innovative – entrepreneurs have lots of ideas and are passionate about their product or 
service. 
• Risk-takers – they are prepared to take a calculated risk in order to maximise their rewards. 
• Hard working – they are prepared to work long hours, especially in the early stages of the 
business. 
• Organised – running a business can be very time consuming. They will know how to use their 
time, so that the business runs efficiently and effectively.  
• Determined – they are able to handle problems and overcome hurdles. Setting up a business 
is difficult, as well as time-consuming. 
• Persuasive – entrepreneurs are good at convincing other people and businesses about their 
idea, for example, persuading suppliers to supply their new business or convincing a 
potential employee to leave a current job and join the start-up, which could be seen as a 
very risky move. They are also good at persuading customers to buy their product or service. 
• Leadership – an entrepreneur must be able to lead his or her own business. They must be 
willing and able to effectively perform more than one role.  
• Lucky – every business needs some good luck e.g. being in the right place at the right time; 
however the more research, planning and preparation that goes into the business start-up, 
the more likely the business is to succeed.  
The important thing to remember about this list is that an entrepreneur is unlikely to possess all these 
characteristics!  Anyone who starts a business has strengths and weaknesses.  However, a successful 
entrepreneur would recognise where their weaknesses lie and take steps to address them, for example 
recruit someone with the right skills to support the entrepreneur in the business in this area. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 12  
1.2 Spotting a business opportunity 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which an 
enterprise and an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business 
environment and how this might impact on small business opportunities. Students must be aware of 
this topic’s relationship with the other topics in this theme and how these areas may impact on business 
decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Customer needs Being aware of different customer needs such as price, quality, choice and 
convenience 
The importance of fulfilling customer requirements 
Market research Objectives of market research 
Methods and techniques 
Qualitative versus quantitative research 
Use of social media in market research 
Importance of reliable data 
Segmentation Benefits and methods of segmentation 
Market mapping to identify gaps in the market 
The competitive 
environment 
Strengths and weaknesses of competition 
How competition affects business decisions 
 
Customer needs 
In order to successfully sell a product or service, a business will need to know what its customer needs 
are. These can be summarised as: 
providing the right product, of the right quality, at the right price,  
at the right time, in the right place 
These can be explained in a little more detail: 
Quality: customers will want the product to be of the quality that they require and expect. This is not 
necessarily high quality, as they may be happy with a cheaper product of a reasonable quality. There 
will be some legal requirements related to quality, covered later in this companion.  
Price: Customers will expect to pay a reasonable price for the good or service. Price can vary depending 
on quality, timing, delivery arrangements and the popularity of the particular item. The price of rush 
hour trains is a good example of how price can change according to different circumstances, in this 
instance – the time of day! 


===== PDF PAGE 14 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 13  
Competition and choice: Most customers would like to have a range of options for their possible 
purchase. This could include different brands, different quality and price combinations and even 
different varieties of the same product. 
Convenience: The growth in on line shopping and home delivery highlights how customer needs have 
changed in recent years. Most successful retailers will now have websites and e-sales options that are 
more convenient and increasingly expected by customers. Opening hours and location are also factors 
that are affected by customer needs. 
Meeting customer needs 
Customers are arguably the most important stakeholder in a business. Without customers there is no 
business.  
Historically many businesses were more production focused. They produced what they were good at 
producing and customers purchased the goods because there was no choice. In the global economy that 
we now live in, this is not an option. There is too much competition and businesses spend large 
amounts of time and money being customer focused.  
A new entrepreneur will start with finding out and identifying what a customer wants and needs 
through market research. He/she will then design a good or service that meets these needs and decide 
on a price to charge that customers are prepared to pay. This will help the business to generate sales 
early on and continue to make sales, which will help to secure the survival of the business. 
Market research 
Initially, the entrepreneur comes up with what he/she believes is a good business idea.  But, how does 
the entrepreneur check that this business idea will actually meet customer needs and therefore has the 
potential to become a viable business?  The answer is for the entrepreneur to conduct some market 
research. 
Market research for a start-up or small business needs to focus on the fundamental issues, such as: 
 How big the market is (measured by sales or volume) 
 How fast the market is growing and the potential for the market to grow further  
 Who the existing competitors are and their share of the market 
 How the market is divided up into segments, for example low price or high quality 
 What kind of customers there are in the market.  It is important for a business to know what 
their customer preferences are in terms of when and where they buy, and the prices they wish 
to pay 
An entrepreneur needs to be satisfied that there is sufficient demand for the product before the 
business sets up.  However, at the start-up stage, funds are often in short-supply, which restricts how 
much market research an entrepreneur can carry out. Because of this, the entrepreneur should ensure 
that he/she is conducting effective market research i.e. ensuring he/she has the right information to 
make good decisions, rather than being overwhelmed with too much information taken from detailed 
reports and statistics.  
It is worth remembering that a small business can learn much about the market by simply trading, 
talking to customers and suppliers on a frequent basis and reading the trade newspapers and 
magazines. This type of market research is not only cheap or even free, but is very effective and will 
help the entrepreneur to recognise what the business is doing right and what changes it should make. 


===== PDF PAGE 15 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 14  
Purpose of market research 
The aim of market research is to gather information. This will enable the business to be informed in its 
decisions and so reduce the risk of failure. Businesses will produce goods and services that the 
customers want at a price they can afford. This will not just be based on guess work, but on accurate 
and up to date data.  
The following list describes some of the areas that market research can be used for: 
 Customers/target market – what type of person will buy the product or are currently buying it? 
What price will they pay and what features do they expect? Where would they like to purchase 
the product? Overall, market research should be used to identify and understand customer 
needs as exactly as possible 
 Promotion – how do my customers find out about products such as mine? 
 Identifying a gap in the market – which firms are my rivals? What prices do they charge and 
what are their products like? Is there room in the market for a new business to open up offering 
a similar product? 
 Demand – how will customer needs change in the future? Are incomes increasing? How will 
technology change what customers want and how they expect to buy it? 
Limitations of market research 
No market research will be completely accurate. If it is concerned with the current market, it will 
normally be based on data from a sample of the market. This may or may not be accurate. Costs will 
restrict the quantity and frequency of market research and researching future markets may not turn out 
as predicted. Rate of change in a market may also make research of limited value. In the IT industry, this 
has meant some businesses being more producer focussed in bringing out new models, rather than 
seeing what customers want first and then developing products to meet these specific needs. 
Primary and secondary research data 
An important distinction can be made between two broad kinds of market research data: 
• Primary data: data collected first-hand for a specific purpose by the business 
• Secondary data: research data that already exists that has been collected for a different purpose 
Primary research can be designed to get exactly the data a business needs. The problem with this form 
of research, however, is that it is usually time-consuming and expensive.  Getting a market research 
agency to conduct the primary research is one option often undertaken by big businesses, but the costs 
are high and the business must wait for the results.  Often for new businesses, primary research is done 
by the entrepreneur, often informally through speaking to potential customers or completing basic 
surveys or questionnaires. 
There are various methods of primary research: 


===== PDF PAGE 16 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 15  
Observation, for example 
counting customers, 
watching what they buy 
and when; can also use 
video recordings or sales 
data from till readings for 
example 
Works well in retail markets, for 
example sit outside a shop and 
watch how many people walk by, 
look at the window displays, stock 
layout etc.  
Can see what consumers buy, 
rather than what they say they will 
buy! 
Expensive and time consuming, 
though larger businesses will use 
data from tills which can provide 
detailed sales records.  
Surveys and 
questionnaires 
Surveys are the process 
of getting market data, 
often using a 
questionnaire and 
analysing the results  
Questionnaires can be undertaken 
by post, by telephone, face to face 
or more commonly online. These 
can be given to existing and 
potential customers. 
They are relatively cheap and can 
produce good quality data, if the 
sample size is large enough. 
Data collected is usually 
quantitative and therefore easy to 
analyse. 
Questions need to be well 
designed, but reply rates are often 
very low, especially for telephone 
and postal methods.  
They can be expensive and time 
consuming for a large sample to 
be obtained which truly 
represents the views of the 
general population.  
Interviews 
These are often 
conducted face to face, 
but can also be 
conducted by phone 
This is a good way to get detailed 
insights from an individual.  
Answers can be checked and 
followed up. 
These are often used in 
combination with questionnaires. 
Interviews are costly in terms of 
time and may be 
unrepresentative, as only small 
numbers will be undertaken.  
Results can be influenced by the 
researcher asking leading 
questions. 
Focus groups  
Groups of actual or 
potential customers are 
brought together to 
discuss a product or 
market 
Focus groups are a good way of 
getting detailed information about 
customer tastes and preferences. 
They provide detailed information 
and opinions.  
These can be costly and time 
consuming to conduct and need 
careful management to keep 
individual opinions independent 
of others opinions.  
Only a small amount of data is 
collected, so may not reflect the 
viewpoints of others fully. 
 
Secondary research 
For new businesses, secondary research will be the main source of market research.  This is because it 
costs less and is quicker and easier to obtain.  Examples of secondary research, which can often be 
obtained free using the internet or by visiting local libraries, are: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 17 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 16  
 
Government information 
 
Provide detailed insights on the economy and on many industry sectors. 
There is also population data published by the government based on the 
census. 
Competitor websites  Valuable information on marketing activities of competitors including 
their products, prices and promotional activities and materials. This may 
include product ratings, which are often independent. 
Customer reviews The internet provides data from product users who give ratings and 
feedback about a particular product. In some cases these are 
independent sites e.g. Trip Advisor, in other cases they are provided by 
the business itself e.g. Amazon. 
Trade associations, trade 
press and magazines 
Most industries have an industry association - they are a good source of 
market analysis, which is particularly useful for new businesses which 
may have little or no experience of the market. 
Newspapers (printed 
press) 
Financial and economic information is provided on a daily basis. 
Newspapers provide local, national and international data which is up to 
date. They also provide case studies of other local businesses. 
Market research reports Organisations such as Mintel and Keynote produce a wide variety of 
expensive reports that analyse individual markets. 
Benefits and drawbacks of secondary research 
By its nature, secondary research will vary in terms of its usefulness. Some drawbacks are as follows: 
 The research has been created for a different user and a different purpose, so may not be 
exactly what the business is looking for 
 Data may be out-of-date, as it will have been completed in the past 
 Information might be biased, because of its previous use or inaccuracy 
 Data is generally available to everyone, so competitors will see the same information 
However, secondary research has many benefits particularly to a new business: 
 The information is readily available, particularly online, so research can be done quickly 
 It is generally cheaper than primary research and in many cases it is free 
 Good secondary research provides an excellent overview of a target market and can save time 
compared to primary research, particularly if the market is distant or spread over a wide area 
Quantitative and qualitative market research 
The distinction between primary and secondary research is really about the different sources of market 
information.  A different way of thinking about market research is to consider two main approaches – 
qualitative and quantitative market research.   
Qualitative research 
Qualitative research is based on opinions, attitudes, beliefs and intentions.  This kind of research deals 
with questions such as “why?”, “would?” or “how?” 


===== PDF PAGE 18 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 17  
Qualitative research aims to understand why customers behave in a certain way or how they may 
respond to a new product.  Given that these opinions are often obtained from small numbers of people, 
the findings are not necessarily statistically valid and may be difficult to draw conclusions from.  
However, such data can highlight potential issues, which can then be explored through quantitative 
research. 
Focus groups and interviews are common methods used to collect qualitative data. This kind of data is 
often revealing and useful, but it is costly and time-consuming to collect, particularly for a start-up. 
Quantitative research 
This is research based on larger samples and therefore should be more reliable, but it can be time 
consuming to analyse and carry out. Quantitative research is concerned with data and addresses 
questions such as “how many?”, “how often”, “who?”, “when?” and “where?” Questionnaires, that 
contain closed questions, are the most common method to gain quantitative market research. 
The results of quantitative research will generally be in numerical form, for example: 
• 35% of customers rate the new product as “attractive” 
• 70% of potential customers use the internet to buy their hotel accommodation in Dorset 
• 3 out of 5 customers will buy a new food product after being offered a free in-store sample 
• Average ratings of a product are 8.5 out of 10 
Social media and market research 
Most market research is out of date before it can be used. It takes time to collect, analyse and present 
findings. Social media, as a form of market research, has many advantages compared to more 
conventional methods:  
 It is very quick. If a small business uses Facebook and/or Twitter then reactions to new products 
or situations will be on Facebook in minutes and can provide instant feedback 
 Provides an insight into the market in which the business is competing through the social media 
of competitors 
 There are free tools available that allow businesses to collect social media statistics. Although 
there will be some costs incurred by the business in terms of staff time analysing this data, 
overall using social media will be very much cheaper than undertaking questionnaires, surveys 
and consumer panels.  
 Users are engaged in the comments process and will interact with the business and each other. 
Comments can also be followed up, for example using Facebook private messaging, to gain 
further data and information. 
 Can allow links to the promotional use of social media which may form part of the firm’s overall 
marketing plan. 
However, there are disadvantages:  
 Although it is claimed that 80% of people with internet access engage with social media, it is 
much harder for a business to engage with its actual and potential customers. This could mean 
that the feedback provided through social media comments is not representative of actual 
opinions and may just represent a small number of comments of people who do not like change 
or new ideas. 
 There is a danger of social media becoming too negative and this message spreading very quickly 
in a viral fashion. 


===== PDF PAGE 19 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 18  
 There will be a need for staff training involved in this process, which will increase costs and be 
time-consuming.  
 For a small business, the monitoring of social media can become very time-consuming, which 
can detract from other important roles in the firm. 
Reliability of Data 
Important business decisions will be made on the basis of market research and therefore it is vitally 
important that it is reliable. Reliability will mean that the results indicate the true situation that the 
research is trying to find out, for example, the research reflects the views of the whole target market 
accurately. 
However, there are many different reasons why market research results might not be reliable. These 
can be summarised as follows: 
Bias: Most market research involves taking samples. The choice of these samples may well involve some 
bias either through the time, location or type of people chosen. Smaller samples are more likely to be 
biased, but large samples are expensive and time-consuming to conduct. 
Out of date: Any research will be out of date once it has been collected. But some, especially secondary 
data, can be very out of date and not a reliable representation of the current situation facing a business. 
This can result in incorrect decisions being made.  
Inaccurate: Either the question or the answers can result in inaccuracies. If the question is not clear, 
then the answers given will be of little use. Quantitative data will often have numerical scores rating 
products, but these often mean different things to different people. For example, some people will not 
give 5*s, whilst others will. Qualitative data will give people’s opinions, but the opinions given may not 
cover all the areas required and respondents may be reluctant to make negative comments, particularly 
if interviews are conducted face to face. 
There are many examples where specialist market research companies get it wrong, so small and new 
businesses must be particularly careful not to base too much of their decision making on too little 
market research. 
 
Market segmentation 
Once a business has undertaken market research, it will have a clearer idea of who its customers or 
potential customers are likely to be. The business may then decide to concentrate on certain groups of 
customers, in order to gain some advantage over its competitors. This also means that the business can 
develop some expertise and reputation when targeting this specific group.  
This means that most businesses do not try and sell to the whole market population. They choose a 
smaller part or segment of the market to concentrate on. This is particularly the case with small 
business start-ups. Businesses are then in a better position to meet their distinct customer needs more 
exactly. 
The table below summarises some of the benefits to a business of segmenting the market: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 20 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 19  
 
Better matching of 
customer needs 
Customer needs differ; creating separate products for each segment 
provides customers with a better opportunity to buy products that meet 
their specific needs; this will increase sales 
Better opportunities for 
growth 
Market segmentation can build sales, for example customers can be 
encouraged to "trade-up" after being introduced to a particular product 
with an introductory, lower-price 
More effective 
promotion 
By segmenting markets, the target customers can be reached more often 
and at lower cost, as there is less waste in the promotion used 
Gain a higher share of the 
market 
Through careful segmentation and targeting, businesses can often 
become the market leader, even if the market is small 
There are many ways in which a market can be broken down into segments. 
A very popular method of “demographic” segmentation looks at factors such as age, gender, and 
income. These are described briefly here, along with other common methods of market segmentation: 
Gender We all know that males and females demand different types of the same product; 
great examples include the clothing, hairdressing, magazine, toiletries and 
cosmetics markets 
Age Businesses often target certain age groups; good examples are toothpaste, look at 
the variety of toothpaste products that are available to buy that target children and 
adults, and toys, for example pre-school, age 5-9, age 10-12, teenagers and family! 
Location Another approach is known as geographic segmentation, which will divide the 
market up by area. This could be as wide as a country or continent, for example the 
“European market”, but for some small businesses it could just be the local town or 
village, which usually relates to small service businesses such as shops and cafes 
Social class Many businesses believe that a consumers "perceived" social class influences their 
preferences for cars, clothes, home furnishings, leisure activities and other 
products and services 
Income Because it is perfectly possible to earn large sums of money in all occupational 
classes, segmentation by income level is also undertaken. Producers of luxury 
goods and services will often use this type of segmentation, so that they do miss 
out on potential customers 
Lifestyle This method of segmentation is where potential consumers are grouped by their 
activities, interests and opinions; examples include hobbies, types of holiday 
preferred or whether people are interested in politics or not 
Limitations of segmentation 
Whilst it is possible for small businesses to gain considerable benefits from segmenting the market 
there are however some disadvantages: 
 Lack of information and data: some markets are poorly researched with little information about 
different customer needs and wants. This is particularly relevant for small businesses, where any 
research conducted may be inaccurate, insufficient or out of date. 


===== PDF PAGE 21 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 20  
 Difficulty in measuring and predicting consumer behaviour: humans don’t all behave in the 
same way all of the time. The way that they behave also changes over time.  A good example is 
the “grey generation” i.e. people aged over 50.  The attitudes and lifestyles of the grey 
generation have changed dramatically in recent years. This can lead to missing potential 
customers through inappropriate targeting with relevant products.  
 Customer segments can be hard to reach, once they have been identified: it is one thing 
spotting a segment; it is another finding the right way to reach target customers with the right 
kind of marketing message in that segment! They may be difficult to reach and inform about 
goods or services. 
 All market objectives: some small businesses will not just want to target one segment; they may 
have ambitions on a bigger scale, so will be looking to expand their geographical area or the type 
of customer.  
Market mapping 
Once an entrepreneur has identified an appropriate segment of the market to target, the challenge is to 
position the product so that it meets the needs and wants of the target customers. 
One way to do this is to use a “market map”. The market map illustrates the range of “positions” that a 
product can take in a market based on two dimensions that are important to the identified target 
market.  
Examples of those dimensions might be: 
• High price v low price 
• Basic quality v high quality 
• Low volume v high volume 
• Necessity v luxury 
• Light v heavy 
• Simple v complex 
• Lo-tech v high-tech 
• Young v old 
Let’s look at an illustrated example of a market map.  The map below shows one possible way in which 
the chocolate bar market could be mapped against two dimensions – quality and price and locates the 
products of the competition: 



===== PDF PAGE 22 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 21  
How might a market map be used? 
One way a market map can be used is to identify where there are “gaps in the market,” in other words 
where there are customer needs that are not being met. For example, in the chocolate bar market, 
Divine Chocolate is a social enterprise which aims to provide better income for cocoa farmers in 
developing countries. It successfully spotted that some consumers were prepared to pay a premium 
price for very high quality chocolate made from Fairtrade cocoa and therefore developed a product to 
meet these specific customer needs. Equally, Green & Black’s exploited the opportunity to sell premium 
chocolate made from organic ingredients. Both these brands successfully moved into the high 
quality/high price quadrant of the market map, before too many competitors beat them to it. 
The trick with a market map is to ensure that market research confirms whether or not there is actually 
any demand for a possible “gap in the market”.  There may be very good reasons why consumers do not 
want to buy a product that might potentially fill a gap identified in the market map, for example who 
would want to pay a high price for a low quality product? 
The Competitive Environment 
Businesses will try to produce a good or service where they do not face much, if any, competition. 
However, in reality, all businesses will have some form of competition. This competition might be strong 
and direct, i.e. there are many businesses producing very similar products, or indirect i.e. competitors 
are producing goods or services that represent an alternative way for consumers to spend their money. 
If there is a little competition, this gives even a small business considerable market power.  
Competition 
When looking at competition in more detail, the first consideration is to determine what a market is.  
One definition of a market is that it is a place where similar goods and services are bought or sold. 
Similar would mean that buyers could make choices. This is not always a direct alternative, for example 
a choice between going to the cinema, going out for a meal or buying a new computer game. Markets 
are also not always physical places, as much of today’s business takes place through online transactions, 
where competitors’ products can be bought and sold. Some of the effects of direct, indirect and no 
competition on a business can be summarised as follows:   
Competition Description Impact on business decisions 
Direct: product Businesses have competitors that 
produce a very similar product.  
Businesses will try and make their products 
different, so they can charge more for them or 
gain customer loyalty. This may be through 
reviewing the quality of the product. A local café 
will aim for good customer service or a 
children’s play area, so that it is different from 
nearby national coffee shops. This will attract 
new and regular customers to their particular 
business. 
Direct: 
price 
Prices will be very similar if not 
identical. For example, petrol prices 
are normally very close to each 
other, despite the petrol station 
visited. 
Small businesses might decide to sell their 
products cheaper, but risk being in a price war. 
In this case, the bigger business with the most 
market power will tend to win, as they are more 
likely to be able to afford to lower their prices. 


===== PDF PAGE 23 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 22  
Competition Description Impact on business decisions 
Direct: location In a local area, a business may 
compete with other similar 
businesses. For products, this can 
be across a wide geographical area 
or even international depending on 
the costs of distribution.  
Small businesses may try and choose an area 
where they can target their products without 
competition, or where competitors target 
different market segments. A small local 
hairdresser may be able to work out an area 
where it can avoid competition from similar 
businesses. 
Indirect Consumers may choose a good or 
service that has similar 
characteristics (leisure, transport), 
but is not a direct competitor. 
Trains, buses and cars may all be 
ways of getting to work and 
therefore do compete with each 
other for customers, but indirectly. 
Some customers will be affected by changes to 
an indirect competitor; some customers will not 
change to, or from, the indirect competitor. For 
example, people may prefer to use a local 
independent cinema even though other leisure 
choices exist. 
None A business has no competition or its 
product is sufficiently different 
from any alternative. 
Small businesses can charge higher prices and 
make good profits, particularly if they are 
targeting a particular segment. Quality however, 
might suffer due to the lack of competition. This 
can make the business complacent, which can 
result in competitors being attracted to the 
market.  
 
The competitive environment is often out of the control of a business, but the decisions that it makes 
will be very much influenced by competitors and the threat of future competitors. New and small 
businesses face particular problems as they can be targeted by other businesses that would prefer to 
dominate profitable markets themselves. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 24 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 23  
1.3 - Putting a Business Idea Into Practice 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware how business implementation can be affected 
by the local and national business environment and how this might impact on a small business. Students 
must be aware of this sections relationship with the other areas in this theme and how again, this may 
impact on business decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
Business aims and 
objectives 
Defining business aims and business objectives 
Financial aims for a start-up business 
Non-financial aims for a start-up business 
Differences in business aims and objectives between firms 
Business revenues, costs 
and profits 
Understanding and calculating business revenue 
Understanding and calculating business costs 
Understanding and calculating business profit and loss 
Interest 
Break even concept and the margin of safety 
Interpreting break even diagrams 
Changes in break-even variables 
Cash and cash-flow The importance of cash in a business 
Cash versus profit 
Interpreting cash-flow forecasts 
Sources of business 
finance 
Short term finance options for small and start-up businesses 
Long-term finance options for small and start-up businesses 
 
Business aims and objectives 
What motivates someone to become an entrepreneur?   
For many people this will be money.  The chance to earn significant profits, buy a yacht, take numerous 
holidays, buy designer goods and send the kids to the best private schools. 
Money and personal wealth may well however, not be the real motivation. Evidence suggests that there 
are many more reasons why someone wants to start a business.  
Every business starts small.  However, if the entrepreneur takes some calculated risks, shows a lot of 
determination and has some luck, a start-up business can become very large, profitable and valuable. 
However, not every entrepreneur wants to build a big business and earn a fortune. 
The objectives when starting a business can be broadly split into two categories: financial objectives 
and non-financial objectives.  


===== PDF PAGE 25 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 24  
The purpose of business aims and objectives 
Aims and objectives provide a direction for any business. Without clear objectives, a business may 
provide goods and services that are not appropriate to why the business was set up. This may result in 
the business not being successful. Having objectives just written down however, is not enough to 
ensure business success. In order for objectives to be effective, they must be implemented and 
monitored over time. Some of the benefits to a business of having clear objectives are as follows:  
Reason  Explanation 
Direction 
 
Clear objectives will allow a business to decide on the direction it should take, 
for example, whether it should expand or not, whether it should change its 
target market or perhaps increase or decrease its range of goods or services. 
Focus for employees It is important that all employees are aware of the business’s objectives and 
that they are attempting to follow and meet them. If all employees are 
working together in the same direction, this will increase efficiency. 
Allows planning The overall firm’s strategy, what it plans to do in the future, will be in its 
business plan. Having clear objectives will allow consistent planning for the 
business as a whole and any departments within the business.  The plan will 
be designed so that the business objectives can be met. 
Measurement of 
success 
Having business objectives allows a business to measure its success. In other 
words, through a business reviewing its objectives, it would be able to see if it 
had achieved them or not or whether it was on the way to achieving them. 
This means that the business can then correct or change its business strategy 
if it is not working. A business might also need to change its business 
objectives if they are proving impossible to meet or if they are being achieved 
too easily.  
 
The ability to measure success is much easier to carry out for financial 
objectives, which are easily quantifiable, rather than non-financial objectives, 
such as “being more ethical” or “increasing customer satisfaction”, which are 
very difficult to measure. 
Financial objectives 
• Survival – over half of new businesses fail within five years and many new businesses do not 
survive much beyond their launch. Often entrepreneurs discover that their business idea was 
not as good as they originally thought and therefore the business cannot run profitably or it runs 
out of cash. Changes in the business environment also may make it harder for a business to be 
successful. The first priority of a business is therefore always to survive. 
• Profit – making profit is the main objective for most businesses. This is the reward to the 
entrepreneur for their hard work and the risks undertaken, often with their own money. Ideally, 
the profit earned is sufficient to provide the entrepreneur with enough income to live on. Profits 
may also be kept in the business to allow it to expand or develop further. Other objectives 
businesses may have which are linked to profit maximisation are increasing revenue, the 
amount made from sales, or decreasing costs. 
• Another financial objective is financial security or personal wealth. Working for someone else 
might mean the loss of a securely paid job, which means the entrepreneur would have no 


===== PDF PAGE 26 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 25  
financial security. Some entrepreneurs have a longer term objective.  They aim to build a 
valuable business that can substantially increase their future wealth. They could be aiming to 
build up the business and sell it, or make it so it will provide a substantial future income for 
them, with no risk to them of being made redundant! 
• Sales maximisation/market share – some businesses will be more concerned with increasing 
their sales and therefore their market share. They may accept lower profits in the short term, in 
order to increase sales.  
Non-financial objectives 
Although most businesses will be focussed on financial objectives, there are many other priorities that 
will exist for new and small businesses. Providing a high quality service will be particularly important for 
a new business. Looking after its customers and its employees would also be an objective for many 
small businesses.  
In many cases, non-financial objectives will link to or be consistent with financial objectives, but not 
always as sometimes even for a small business quality might conflict with profit. Therefore when 
businesses set and use objectives, they will prioritise the areas which are most important to their 
organisation and the owners. 
Here are some of the non-financial motives that are often quoted by entrepreneurs: 
• Social objectives such as benefiting the environment 
• More control over working life – want to choose what kind of work is done; the need for greater 
independence is a major motivator 
• A more flexible and convenient work schedule, including being able to work from or close to 
home; this motive is an important reason behind the many home-based business start-ups 
• Skills are being wasted and their potential is not being fulfilled 
• Escaping an uninteresting job or career 
• Pursuing an interest or hobby that they enjoy 
• Want to be the boss, as they are fed up with being told what to do 
• Want the feeling of personal satisfaction from building up a business 
• Fed up with working in a business hierarchy or a bureaucratic organisation, where there are lots 
of rules; people with entrepreneurial characteristics often feel stifled working with and for 
others! 
• Major change in personal circumstances for example redundancy, divorce, illness, bereavement 
 
Different aims and objectives 
Different businesses will have different aims and objectives. This is particularly the case with small 
businesses, where every entrepreneur is likely to have different motives for starting up their own 
business. For example: 
Entrepreneur 1: has recently been made redundant from a large building firm. He would like to turn his 
skills and experience into building maintenance in his local area. He wants varied work and enough 
money to live off, but does not want to build up the business or travel far. 
Entrepreneur 2: has a new business idea for a web application for finding places for a good night out. 
The idea is proving very popular in the local trials. The entrepreneur wants to develop this application 
and sell it all over the world in order to make a lot of profit.  


===== PDF PAGE 27 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 26  
Business objectives will also be affected by the external environment which firms operate within. A 
small low cost hairdresser may have direct competition in one area, indirect competition from an 
expensive hairdressing national brand in another area and no competition at all in a further area. The 
objectives of such a small business will be different because of the situation it finds itself in.   
 
Business revenues, costs and profits 
In order for a business to calculate its profit (or loss) it needs to work out its total costs and total 
revenue.  
Costs are the spending that a business has to undertake in order to make goods and provide services. 
Every business has costs, but they vary in terms of their type and amount. For a new business, 
estimating what the likely costs are going to be is often very difficult.  
Successful businesses place great importance on costs. In most cases they want to ensure they are kept 
as low as possible. There are many reasons for this including: 
• Increases in costs reduce the possible profits that the business can make 
• They are the main cause of cash-flow problems in a small business 
• They will change as the output or activity of a business changes 
Costs can be divided into two types: fixed and variable  
Fixed costs 
Fixed costs do not change as output varies.  In other words, they are fixed even if output moves up or 
down from period to period. 
Examples of fixed costs include: 
• Rent and council tax 
• Salaries 
• Marketing, for example advertising, market research 
• Insurance 
• Interest repayments 
• Leased equipment charges 
 
It is worth remembering that just because a cost is classified as “fixed”, it does not mean that the cost 
will stay the same forever. A fixed cost can change over time. For example, the rent of an office or 
shop may stay the same for 5 years.  However, the rent may change (up or down) when the rental 
agreement is renegotiated when due. The important point about a cost, like rent, being “fixed” is that it 
has to be paid, whatever the level of sales achieved. 
 
Fixed costs are particularly important when it comes to calculating the break even output of a business.  
The higher the level of fixed costs in a business, the higher the output needed to cover these costs and 
break even.  


===== PDF PAGE 28 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 27  
Variable costs 
Variable costs change when output changes. In other words the higher the output, the higher the 
variable costs.  
Variable costs tend to be those relating directly to the production or sale of a product.  Good examples 
include: 
• Raw materials and bought-in stocks and components 
• Wages based on hours worked or amount produced 
• Marketing costs based on sales  
• Agent and other commissions 
Total variable costs can be calculated by a simple formula:  
Variable cost per unit x output 
 
Total costs 
The total costs of a business can be calculated by simply adding together the variable costs, at different 
levels of output, to the firm’s fixed costs. The formula therefore is: 
Total costs (TC) = total fixed costs (TFC) + total variable costs (TVC) 
Example: 
Graham’s van repair business is a small business that has the following costs and sales output for 
March: 
Variable costs per job £75 
Garage rent and rates £500 
Salaries £1,500 
Advertising £100 
Other fixed costs £400 
Expected number of jobs for month 100 
To calculate the total costs for the business, start with the variable costs. These equal £75 per unit x 100 
jobs = £7,500 
Fixed costs = £500 (garage rent and rates) + £1,500 (salaries) + £100 (advertising) + £400 (other fixed 
costs) = £2,500 
Therefore the total costs for Graham’s business equal £7,500 (total variable costs) + £2,500 (total fixed 
costs) = £10,000  
As output increases the total costs will not increase as fast. This is because the fixed costs will stay the 
same. This means that a business may have lower average costs of production as it grows. 


===== PDF PAGE 29 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 28  
Revenue and Profit 
Revenue 
Revenue is the money the business receives from its sales. This can be represented simply using the 
formula: 
Revenue = selling price per unit x quantity sold 
 
In practice, most businesses sell more than one different product and have more than one selling price, 
which makes the calculation more complicated. However, the method remains the same. 
In the above example, if Graham charges £100 for each job that he completes, his revenue will equal: 
£100 (selling price per unit) x 100 (quantity sold) = £10,000. 
Is Graham’s business making a profit?  
Profit 
Having calculated the total costs and the total revenue for a business, it can now work out its profit. 
Profit is the financial return or reward that the owners of a business aim to achieve to reward them for 
the risk that they take. It will measure the success of that investment. 
Profit is also an important signal to other providers of finance to a business.  Banks, suppliers and other 
lenders are more likely to provide finance to a business that can demonstrate that it makes a profit, or is 
likely to do so in the near future, and that it can pay debts as they fall due. 
Profit is also an important source of finance for a business.  Profits earned, which are kept in the 
business and are not distributed to the owners via dividends or other payments, are known as retained 
profits. Retained profits are an important source of finance for any business, but especially start-up or 
small businesses.  The moment a product is sold for more than it cost to produce, then a profit is earned 
which can be reinvested 
Profit can be measured and calculated by the following formula:  
PROFIT = TOTAL REVENUE - TOTAL COSTS 
 
Here is an example which illustrates the formula in action: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 30 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 29  
 
Sales Costs Profit or loss? 
£100,000 £75,000 £25,000 profit 
£100,000 £125,000 (£25,000) loss  
Note: negative figures are shown in brackets 
 Total sales greater than total costs = PROFIT 
 Total sales less than total costs = LOSS 
➢ Total sales = total costs = BREAK EVEN 
 
Whatever the result, profit, loss or breaking even a business will always need to review its performance 
and look at how it might be improved. Can costs be decreased? How? And by when? Can revenue be 
increased? Should the price stay the same? Can more be sold? Is there a need for further investment to 
decrease costs or increase revenue? 
Interest  
As well as the costs involved in running a business, a business owner may also have to pay interest, if 
the business needed to borrow money in the form of a loan or mortgage when it was set up. The 
business may also arrange an overdraft with the bank, which will also involve the payment of interest. 
Interest will therefore form part of the firm’s total costs. The amount needed to be paid may vary if 
interest rates change. This is however, dependent on the terms of the loan/mortgage/overdraft, which 
would have been agreed with the bank and the business owner, when the specific source of finance was 
first taken out.  
The following formula can be used to calculate the interest rate on a loan as a percentage: 
 
Interest on loans (%) = total repayment – borrowed amount  x  100 
borrowed amount 
 
Example: 
If a new business start-up borrowed £50,000 but repaid £60,000 in total, the interest percentage would 
be:   £60,000 - £50,000   x   100 =   20% 
                 £50,000    
  


===== PDF PAGE 31 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 30  
Break even  
 
A business will calculate its break-even point in order for it to have an idea of how much it will need to 
produce to survive. Break-even is the point where total revenue is equal to total costs, which means the 
business is not making a profit or a loss. Through calculating break even, a business knows how many 
units it will need to produce and sell in order to start making a profit.  
This information can be represented on a break even diagram or graph and will show the potential 
profit or loss that could be made at different levels of output, as revenue and costs change.  
Break even diagram for Business A: 
This break even diagram shows that fixed costs are drawn as a straight line, which is the case because 
they do not change with output. The total cost line is also shown, instead of the variable cost line on its 
own, as the total cost line takes into account both fixed and variable costs. The total cost line starts at 
the same point as fixed costs, as even if the business is making no output, fixed costs still need to be 
paid. At zero output however, variable costs are zero resulting in fixed costs and total costs being the 
same value. The revenue line is lastly drawn, which starts at zero and goes up diagonally. This is because 
as the business makes and sells more, it will gain more revenue.  
In this example, Business A’s break-even point is 10,000 units, the point where total costs and total 
revenue cross. This means that if the business manages to produce and sell this amount of output, it will 
not be making a profit or a loss.   
Margin of safety 
Business A can also calculate the margin of safety from the break-even diagram. This is the difference 
between its current level of output/sales and the break-even point. If Business A was currently selling or 
producing 15,000 units, its margin of safety would be 15,000 (current level of output) – 10,000 (break-
even point) = 5,000 units. Business A would want the margin of safety to be as high as possible, as this 
shows how much output or sales could fall before it hits its break-even point and then after this, the 
business would be making a loss. 
Variable 
costs 
Margin of safety 
Break even point 


===== PDF PAGE 32 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 31  
A reminder of the formula for margin of safety is shown here: 
Margin of safety  = actual or budgeted sales – break even sales 
Calculating profit and loss from the break-even chart 
A business can determine the amount of predicted profit or loss level it expects to make at different 
levels of output from the break-even diagram. As already discussed, profit is calculated by deducting 
total costs from total revenue.  From reviewing the break-even diagram for Business B (on the next 
page)  it can be seen, at an output level of 80 units, the business is making £160 revenue and its total 
costs equate to £140. If we subtract the total costs from the total revenue the profit at this level of 
output equals:  £160 - £140 = £20.  
It is clear the business is making a profit at this level  of output, as the firm’s break-even point is 60 units 
(the point where total revenue = total costs) and as the business is operating at 80 units, a higher 
output level than the break-even point, then the business must be making a profit. 
However, if the business is operating below the break-even point of 60 units, the business will be 
making a loss. Looking again at the break even chart for Business B and assuming the business is 
producing 20 units, the value of total costs at this level of output is £80 and the total revenue figure is 
£40. Remember that profit = total revenue – total costs, so in this case, the business is making a loss as: 
£40 - £80 = (£40). 
This method of calculating profit/loss for a business can be applied to any level of output for a business 
that has produced a break even diagram. However, the difficulty is that sometimes values are difficult to 
read from the diagram and therefore if a business relied on this method only of calculating profit, 
inaccurate figures may be calculated and therefore used in decision making. For example, looking again 
at the break even chart for Business B, can the profit or loss be accurately worked out, purely from 
reading the graph, if the firm was operating at an output level of 55 units? 
Monthly break even chart for Business B: 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs / Revenues £
Number of Units 
Fixed costs Total Costs Sales Revenue
Break even 
point


===== PDF PAGE 33 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 32  
 
The impact of changes in revenue and costs on the break-even point 
As well as calculating profit and loss and identifying the break-even point, the break-even diagram can 
also be used to help business owners with decision making and “what if” scenarios. By changing one or 
more variables in the break-even diagram, business owners, or business decision-makers, can then 
assess the impact of this change on the break-even point. This will allow worst and best case situations 
to be prepared for by the business. Some examples are included here to illustrate this further. 
Example 1: Break even diagram to show the impact on the break-even point of an increase in selling 
price 
 
 
In the above situation, a business’s selling price has increased from £2 to £3. This has resulted in the 
amount needed to be sold to break even (the break-even output) decreasing from 60 units to 30 units. 
In this case, the business may then conduct some research to see if customers would be willing to pay 
the increased selling price or whether demand would drop significantly, as even though the break point 
has lowered, in this case it would take the business a significantly longer time to reach this point due to 
a drop in demand. 
  
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs/revenue £s
Number of units
Revenue (1) Revenue (2) Fixed costs Total costs
New break
even point
Original break 
even point


===== PDF PAGE 34 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 33  
Example 2: Break even diagram to show the impact on the break-even point of an increase in fixed 
costs 
 
In this case, the fixed costs of the business have increased from £60 to £70. This has increased the total 
costs which has resulted in the amount needed to be sold to break even (the break-even output) 
increasing from 60 units to 70 units. In the case, if the business anticipates that its fixed costs are going 
to rise, which would ultimately make it harder to break even and therefore become profitable, it may 
look for different ways to become more efficient to lower costs, to overcome this change. 
Calculating break even using the formula 
Rather than drawing a break even diagram to calculate the break-even point each time, a quicker and 
more efficient method of calculating break-even is to use the formulae. The break-even formulae are 
shown in the box: 
 
                 Break even output =           fixed cost 
(sales price – variable cost) 
This will give you the number of units the business needs to produce and sell to break even 
 
                 Break-even point in costs/revenue = break-even point in units x sales price 
This formula can be used to calculate the revenue (or costs!) at the breakeven level of output 
 
 
Break even output using the formula 
In order to calculate the break-even output using the formula, three variables are required. These are 
fixed costs, sales price and variable cost per unit. 
In example 2, the original fixed costs of the business were £60.  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Costs/revenue £s
Number of units
Revenue Fixed costs (1) Fixed costs (2) Total costs (1) Total costs (2)
New break
even pointOriginal break 
even point


===== PDF PAGE 35 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 34  
The current variable cost per unit is £1. Variable costs are not drawn directly onto the break-even chart. 
However, this value can still be calculated if total costs and fixed costs are known and the formula here 
is used: 
Total variable costs = total costs – total fixed costs 
 
From reviewing the chart, at an easy to read point, i.e. 10 units, the original total costs were £70 and 
the original total fixed costs were £60. Total variable costs at this level of output therefore = £70 - £60 = 
£10. 
To calculate the variable cost per unit, the number of units just needs to be divided into this amount = 
£10/10 = £1. 
In order to calculate the sales price or the selling price per unit, a similar method can be applied. At an 
easy to read point i.e. 10 units, the total sales revenue = £20. To calculate the sales price or selling price 
per unit, the number of units just needs to be divided into this amount = £20/10 = £2. 
We now have all the variables required to calculate the break-even output level using the formula as 
shown: 
Break even output =           fixed cost  =      £60    = 60 units 
(sales price – variable cost)  £2 - £1 
This being the same answer as obtained from the break-even chart. 
           
Break-even point in costs/revenue using the formula 
We will use example 2 again to illustrate how to calculate the break-even point in costs/revenue. A 
reminder of the formula is: 
 
 
Break-even point in costs/revenue = break-even point in units x sales price 
 
 
The original break-even point in units = 60 units x £2 (sales price) = £120. This again shows the same 
value on the “y” axis for costs/revenue in £s as the break-even diagram, at the break-even point. 
The benefit of using break even analysis to a business 
 
 Break-even is a very useful business tool, as it can quickly illustrate what happens to a firm’s 
profits at different output levels. This can help a business with decision-making about cost levels 
and selling prices.  


===== PDF PAGE 36 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 35  
 A business could create a series of break-even diagrams to illustrate the impact on the break-
even point if one of the variables on the graph changed. This is called “what if” analysis. 
Break even does however have limitations: 
 It assumes that the average price that goods sell at will stay the same.  
 It gives the impression that just because products are produced that they will be sold at the 
average price.  
 It can become very complicated to a business which sells many different products. 
 It assumes that variable costs are proportional to output, whereas they may get cheaper as 
output rises or more expensive if workers have to be paid overtime.  
 It may mean that the business focuses on breaking even rather than making a profit! 
Cash and cash-flow 
Cash-flow describes the movement of cash into and out of a business. It is not the same as profit. Many 
profitable businesses fail because they do not have enough cash to pay their bills. This is because profit 
is recorded straight after a sale, whereas cash is recorded when it is either spent or received by the 
business. If a business offers trade credit to a customer for example, of 30 days, then the sale and 
therefore profit is documented when the goods are taken by the customer, but the cash will not be 
recorded until payment i.e. the cash is received 30 days later! 
In business, cash is always on the move… 
• Cash-flows into the bank account when customers pay for their sales, when a loan is received 
from the bank, interest is received or when assets are sold 
• Cash-flows out of the bank account when suppliers are paid, employee wages and salaries are 
paid, interest is paid to the bank and so on… 
You need to be able to distinguish between: 
• Cash inflows: movements of cash into a business 
• Cash outflows: movements of cash out of the business 
The difference between the cash inflows and cash outflows during a specific period, for example a 
week or a month is known as the “net cash-flow”. 
Net cash-flow = cash inflows  – cash outflows for a given time period 
The challenge for any business, particularly new businesses, is to manage its net cash-flow successfully, 
so that the business does not run out of money. 
Main types of cash inflow and outflow 
The main types of cash-flow can be summarised as follows: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 36  
 
Cash inflows Cash outflows 
Cash sales Payment of overheads, wages and salaries 
Receipts from trade customers Payment of suppliers, for example raw materials, inventories 
Sale of spare assets Buying equipment 
Investment of share capital Interest on bank loan or overdraft 
Personal funds invested Payment of dividends 
Receipt of bank loan Repayment of loans 
Government grants Income tax, VAT and corporation tax 
 
Why businesses suffer cash-flow problems 
Start-up and small businesses are especially vulnerable to cash-flow problems. The reasons for this can 
be divided into two types: 
• not enough money coming into the business fast enough  
• too much money going out of the business too quickly 
In addition, if a business does have cash-flow problems then new businesses or businesses facing 
financial difficulties will often not have reserves of retained profits to see them through until things 
improve. If a business runs out of cash and is not able to obtain new finance, it will become insolvent. 
If a business has a positive cash-flow it will build up cash reserves. This can be saved in case of future 
problems or used for future investment. 
The cash-flow forecast 
The cash-flow forecast predicts the net cash-flows of the business over a future period. It can be used to 
identify likely cash-flow problems and help avoid or solve them. 
The forecast estimates what the cash inflows into the bank account and outflows out of the bank 
account will be.   The result of the cash-flow forecast is also an estimate of the bank balance at the end 
of each period covered (normally this is for each month). An example of a simple cash-flow forecast is 
shown below: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 37  
 
£'000  January February March April May June 
Cash inflows  200 250 200 150 100 250 
Cash outflows  250 300 300 100 250 150 
Net cash-flow  
(cash inflows – cash outflows) 
(50) (50) (100) 50 (150) 100 
Opening balance 
(same figure as the closing 
balance for the previous month) 
250 200 150 50 100 (50) 
Closing balance 
(net cash-flow + opening balance) 
200 150 50 100 (50) 50 
As can be seen from the table, the closing balance becomes the opening balance for the next month. 
This is then added to the net cash-flow for that month, which may be a positive (April) or negative 
(May), in order to calculate the closing balance for that month. The closing balance each month might 
be a surplus, which means the business has a positive cash balance at the end of the month, or a deficit, 
which means that the business has a negative cash balance at the end of the month (often indicated by 
brackets, as in May).  
Looking at this cash-flow forecast a little more carefully, it shows that the business will start the period, 
i.e. January, with a cash surplus or opening balance of £250,000. During the first three months, the net 
cash-flow is negative, as it is predicted that there will be more cash outflows than inflows, which will 
reduce the closing balance surplus to £50,000 in March. In April and June, the cash outflows are 
estimated to reduce considerably making them less than the cash inflows, resulting in a surplus in the 
closing balance in those two months.  In May again, the outflows are predicted to be higher than the 
cash inflows. The opening balance, of £100, is not enough to cover this increase and therefore the 
business is forecasted to go into a deficit of £50,000. 
Businesses must carefully monitor when the business is forecast to experience a deficit, as this 
highlights the business may run out of cash! 
To recap the key formulae for cash-flow forecasts are: 
Net cash-flow = cash inflows – cash outflows in a given period 
Opening balance = closing balance of the previous period 
Closing balance = opening balance + net cash-flow 
Why the cash-flow forecast is so important 
A business uses a cash-flow forecast to: 
• Identify potential shortfalls in cash balances in advance – think of the cash-flow forecast as an 
“early warning system”.  This is the most important reason for a cash-flow forecast and enables 
the business to take action, so that it does not experience any cash-flow issues, which can 
ultimately prevent the business from trading and becoming insolvent 


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 38  
• Makes sure that the business can afford to pay suppliers and employees - suppliers which do 
not get paid will soon stop supplying the business; it is even worse if employees are not paid on 
time, as in this case there would be no-one to either produce the goods or provide customers 
with the level of service that they demand 
• Spot problems with customer payments – preparing the forecast encourages the business to 
look at how quickly customers are paying their debts. This is only an issue in some businesses 
and not all. For example, most retailers take most of their sales in cash/credit cards at the point 
of sale i.e. at the time of purchase 
• Compare actual figures to forecast figures – this allows management to spot if there are any 
potential issues and take appropriate action, for example if there are significant differences 
between the forecasted figures and the actual figures, a business owner would need to arrange 
appropriate sources of finance to cover any shortfalls in cash 
• External stakeholders, such as banks, may require a regular forecast - certainly if the business 
has a bank loan, the bank will want to look at the business cash-flow compared to its forecast at 
regular intervals, to ensure that the business will continue to make its repayments  
 
Main causes of cash-flow problems 
A cash-flow problem arises when a business struggles to pay its debts as they become due. When cash-
flow is consistently negative and the business uses up its cash balances, then the problem becomes 
serious. The main causes of cash-flow problems are: 
Factor Why it causes a cash-flow problem… 
Low profits or 
(worse) losses 
There is a direct link between low profits or losses and cash-flow problems. 
Remember, most loss-making businesses eventually run out of cash 
Over-investment 
in capacity 
This happens when a business spends too much on machinery, equipment or 
premises. Factory equipment, which is not being used, does not generate revenue, 
so is often a waste of cash 
Too much stock Holding too much inventory or stock ties up cash and there is an increased risk that 
these inventories become obsolete i.e. cannot be sold and therefore cannot 
generate any cash inflows 
Allowing 
customers too 
much credit 
Offering credit to customers, i.e. buy now and pay later, is a good way to build 
customer loyalty and long-term revenue, but late payment is a common problem 
and slow-paying customers put a strain on cash-flow 
Overtrading This occurs where a business expands too quickly, putting pressure on short-term 
finance.  For example, a retail chain might try to open too many stores too quickly, 
before each starts to generate profits  
Seasonal demand Predictable changes in seasonal demand create cash-flow problems, but because 
they are expected, a business should be able to handle these in an appropriate way 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 39  
Sources of business finance 
A start-up or existing small business will need finance. They will need it for various reasons, short term 
and long term. There are different sources of finance available and the actual source chosen by a 
business will depend on the amount and reason the finance is required, as well as the circumstances 
and the type of legal status the business has. 
The challenge of raising money 
Often the hardest part of starting a business is raising the money to get going.  
An entrepreneur might have a great business idea and clear plan for how to exploit a market 
opportunity.  However, unless sufficient finance can be raised, the entrepreneur will struggle to make 
the most of the opportunity. 
Raising finance for a start-up requires careful planning.  The entrepreneur needs to decide: 
• How much finance is required? Raising finance is hard work and expensive – a start-up business 
should avoid having to go through the process too often! 
• When and for how long the finance is needed?  A useful distinction can be made between long-
term and short-term finance 
• What security (if any) can be provided? This will affect the ability of the business to raise a bank 
or other loan where the lender requires some security (or “collateral”) 
• Whether the entrepreneur is prepared to give up some control (ownership) of the start-up in 
return for investment 
• Whether the cost of the finance, for example the interest charged, is justified 
The finance needs of a start-up should also take account of these key areas: 
• Set-up costs: the costs that are incurred before the business starts to trade 
• Getting ready to produce: the fixed or long term assets that the business needs before it can 
begin to trade, such as machinery, equipment, vehicles etc 
• Working capital: money required for the day to day operation of the business. Money will be 
needed by the business to buy the stocks required by the business, such as raw materials, and 
allowance should be made for amounts that will be owed by customers once sales begin, if the 
business chooses to offer its customers trade credit 
• Growth and development: in the future the business may wish to grow and expand and 
therefore will need to invest in extra capacity, for example in extra space to produce more 
products  
Finance to cover different periods 
An important consideration when obtaining finance for a business is when and for how long the finance 
is needed.   A useful distinction can be made between long-term and short-term sources of finance.  The 
table summarises the main examples and uses of each category: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 41 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 40  
 
Long-term Short-term 
Finances the whole business over many years Finances day-to-day trading of the business; 
repayable usually within a year 
Examples: Examples: 
 Personal savings 
 Retained profits 
 Share capital 
 Venture capital 
 Bank loans 
 Crowd funding 
 Bank overdraft 
 Trade credit 
 
 
Short-term sources of business finance: 
Trade credit  
This is used by many businesses as a short-term source of finance. Trade credit essentially means that a 
firm’s suppliers will allow it to have the goods and pay for them at a later date.  
 This can give time for the business to use the goods and sell its products before it pays the 
suppliers, which will improve its cash-flow position.  
 If the bills are not paid on time however, this can lead to the business getting a bad reputation 
and losing future credit arrangements with the supplier.  
 It can also be particularly difficult for new start-up businesses to negotiate trade credit with 
suppliers, as there is a risk that the business will fail and suppliers may end up not getting paid! 
Bank overdraft 
Businesses of all sizes use bank overdrafts as a means of finance.  As a business gets bigger, it often 
finds that its overdraft facility also needs to grow.  That is because an overdraft is essentially a short-
term source of finance that is available to help fund the day-to-day payments required by a business. It 
allows the business to withdraw funds from its account that are not there, up to an agreed maximum 
limit, and is only used when the business requires additional, temporary amounts of money. 
 The big advantage of a bank overdraft is its flexibility. If a business experiences a short-term 
shortage of cash or an unexpected cost, then it can be paid by using some of the overdraft 
facility.  Interest is only paid on the amount used. 
 The main downside of an overdraft is that it is repayable to the bank at any time. A business may 
have an overdraft facility of £100,000 i.e. it can owe the bank up to that amount, but the bank 
may lower or even withdraw that facility at any time.  This happened to numerous businesses 
with bank overdrafts during the credit crunch of 2007-8, many of whom were relying on their 
overdraft to stay in business.  
 The other drawback of an overdraft is that they usually have high levels of interest attached to 
them, making them an expensive form of finance when they are used.  
 


===== PDF PAGE 42 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 41  
Long-term sources of business finance: 
Personal savings 
An entrepreneur will often invest personal cash balances into a start-up. This can be personal savings 
from the bank or building society.  This can also be in the form of providing assets for the business, for 
example using an own car, or it can be as simple as working for nothing! By using this source of finance, 
the entrepreneur is providing a strong signal, to other potential investors and the bank, of his/her 
commitment to the business venture.   
 This is a cheap form of finance that is readily available.  
 Investing personal savings maximises the control the entrepreneur keeps over the business.   
 The amount that is available may be limited, resulting in this being used with other sources of 
finance to fund the business. 
Loans  
These might be from friends and family or from financial institutions, such as a bank.  
Friends and family: 
Friends and family who are supportive of the business idea may be willing to provide money either 
directly to the entrepreneur or into the business.   
 This can be quick and cheap to arrange (certainly compared with a bank loan).  
 The interest and repayment terms may be more flexible than a bank loan.   
 However, borrowing in this way can add to the stress faced by an entrepreneur, particularly if 
the business gets into difficulties, as it can cause disagreements. 
 The amount available may be limited, resulting in this being combined with other sources of 
finance. 
Bank loan: 
A bank loan is an amount of money borrowed for a set period with an agreed repayment schedule. The 
repayment amount will depend on the size and duration of the loan and the rate of interest.  This is a 
common source of finance that a small or new business would choose. However, bank loans tend to be 
more readily available for well-established and growing businesses, rather than start-up businesses.  
The reason for this is risk – banks prefer to loan to successful businesses, which makes them more likely 
to be able to repay the loan and interest. 
If a bank loan can be obtained then there are several advantages for a start-up or an established small 
business: 
 The business is guaranteed the money for a certain period - generally three to ten years (unless 
it breaks the loan conditions). 
 Loans can be matched to the lifetime of the equipment or other assets the loan is being used for 
 While interest must be paid on the loan, there is no need to provide the bank with a share in the 
business, so no control is lost. 
 Interest rates may be fixed for the term, making it easier to forecast interest payments and 
cash-flow. 
 Repayments are made in instalments, resulting in the business having access to substantial 
amounts of cash that does not need to be paid back all in one-go.  
There are also some disadvantages of a bank loan: 


===== PDF PAGE 43 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 42  
 Time consuming - a new business would need to produce a detailed business plan to show to 
the bank in order to secure the loan, which would take up time and resource; however it could 
be argued in the long-run, that this careful planning would help the business to have a greater 
chance of success in the future. 
 Security - normally has to be given to the bank on some of the assets of the business.  The bank 
will have control over these assets if the business fails. 
 Lack of flexibility - a small business might take a loan out for £50,000 but finds it only needed 
£30,000.  That means that interest is being paid on £20,000 of loan that it does not need. 
 Interest – interest must be paid on the loan amount, which increases the costs of the business. 
Venture capital 
Venture capitalists often invest in small businesses.  Venture capital can be gained from professional 
investors or companies who typically invest between £10,000 to £750,000.   
Venture capitalists tend to have made their money by setting up and selling their own business – in 
other words they have proven entrepreneurial expertise. The advantages and disadvantage of this 
source of finance are: 
 Venture capitalists often make their own skills, experience and contacts available to the firm. 
 They have access to large amounts of funds. 
 The venture capital company or investor will usually want a share of the business and of the 
profits, which can result in some loss of control over the firm for the entrepreneur, which he/she 
may not want to give up. 
Obtaining venture capital is quite different from raising debt or a loan from a lender, such as a bank. 
Lenders have a legal right to interest on a loan and repayment of the capital, irrespective of the success 
or failure of the business. By contrast, venture capital is often invested in exchange for a stake in the 
company where the return will be dependent on the growth and profitability of the business. 
Not every business is suitable for investment by a venture capitalist.  Such investors prefer to invest in 
small entrepreneurial businesses which are aiming (and have the potential) for sales and profit growth. 
As a rough guide unless a business can offer the prospect of significant turnover growth within five 
years, it is unlikely to be of interest to a venture capital firm. 
Share capital 
Small or new businesses that are set up as a private limited company can raise finance by selling shares 
in the company.  There are many advantages to a business of raising finance through share issues: 
 Large sums of money can be raised. 
 Capital does not have to be repaid. 
 There is no interest – dividend payments can be missed if profits are low. 
There are however some disadvantages including: 
 Possible loss of control if the original owners sell more than 50% of the total shares. 
 Need to satisfy shareholders expectations of dividends and share price growth. 
Retained profit 
This is a very important source of finance for an existing small business, but is clearly not suitable for a 
new business, as they are yet to build up reserves of profit! 


===== PDF PAGE 44 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 43  
The idea is simple.  When a business has worked out its profits, the owners or shareholders can decide 
whether to take the profits for themselves or reinvest the profits back into in the business.   
Retained profits have several major advantages: 
 They are cheap, as no interest has to be paid on them. 
 They are very flexible – the business owners have complete control over how they are 
reinvested and what proportion is kept, rather than paid as dividends. 
 They do not dilute or reduce the ownership of the organisation, so for companies there is no 
increased risk of a takeover. 
There are, however, also some disadvantages: 
 If a business needs some temporary finance because it is facing difficulties, then it is unlikely to 
have any profits that it can use. 
 Growth may be slow if it is dependent on retained profits, as profits may not be high enough to 
finance the growth quickly. 
Crowdfunding 
Crowdfunding is a recent way of small businesses or projects raising money from outside investors, 
often through the internet or a crowd funding platform such as www.kickstarter.com or 
www.crowdfunder.co.uk  
A proposal is publicised and the aim is that a large number of small investors will be attracted from all 
over the world. The investors will generally be in sympathy with the aims of the project or the cause for 
which the funds are being raised. 
There are some advantages to a business of using crowdfunding to secure finance: 
 It provides cheap investment when other sources of external finance may not be available. 
 If the project is interesting or newsworthy it might attract good publicity, which will help the 
business in becoming successful. 
 The business may create a web blog or use social media to keep investors informed, which might 
provide ongoing finance. 
 Investors may have experience or skills that they can offer the business. 
There will however be drawbacks: 
 Investors will need to be offered a return; this might be free use of the good or service 
produced, or a share in the profits. Some schemes will also provide shares, which therefore 
dilutes the control of the original owners of the business.  
 There is a risk that there will be a limit to the amount of money investors are willing to use in 
this way. 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 45 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 44  
1.4 - Making the Business Effective 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business environment 
and how this might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this topic’s relationship with 
the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
The options for start-up and 
small businesses 
Limited and unlimited liability 
Business ownership: sole trader, partnership and private limited 
company 
Franchise operations 
Business location Factors effecting business location 
The marketing mix Definition of marketing mix 
Balancing the marketing mix 
Impact of change on the marketing mix 
Business plans Content of a business plan 
Purpose of a business plan 
 
Business organisation 
Before the different forms of legal structures of a sole trader, partnership and a private limited 
company are considered, the very important issues of “unlimited liability” and “limited liability” will be 
discussed. 
Unlimited liability 
There is a big risk when operating as a sole trader or a partnership. It occurs because, in the eyes of the 
law, there is no difference between the person running the business and the business itself.  When it 
comes to money owed by a business, the sole trader or partners have to use their own personal funds 
to pay these debts, if there is not enough money in the business to do so. The sole trader or the 
partners are, therefore, liable for any debts that the business incurs. This is called unlimited liability. 
As the sole trader or partners are personally responsible for any debts run up by the business, this 
means their homes or other assets owned by the entrepreneur(s) may be at risk if the business runs into 
trouble. This does happen and each year thousands of people become personally bankrupt, many of 
them through failed businesses. Some businesses have however, a lower risk of failure, where the 
owner avoids running up debts through buying and selling in cash, meaning there is no need to borrow 
large amounts of money. 
Limited liability 
Shareholders may be individuals or other companies. They are not responsible for the company's 
debts. Shareholders may only lose the money they have invested in the company if a business goes 
bankrupt, to help pay off any outstanding debts or liabilities. This means that the liability of 


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 45  
shareholders is limited to the value of their investment into the company’s shares.  This concept is 
called limited liability. 
It costs very little to set up a business as a private limited company and it can be set up very quickly. A 
summary of the benefits to the business of limited liability are: 
 Investors encouraged – the owner who normally owns shares, and all other investors who 
purchase shares, are protected in the way that they can only lose the money they have put into 
the business, not their personal possessions and property. This should encourage more people 
to invest in the business, as there is less risk. 
 Legal separation – a company has a separate legal identity to the business owners, unlike a sole 
trader or a partnership where the business is seen as the same as the owners in the eyes of the 
law. With limited liability any action against the business is taken against the company, not the 
owners 
Remember: LIMITED LIABILITY is only a benefit to private (and public) limited companies. Sole traders 
and partnerships do not benefit from this. They have UNLIMITED LIABILITY. This is a common area of 
confusion, which needs revising carefully. 
Forms of Business ownership 
The vast majority of start-ups and small businesses in the UK choose to operate either as a sole trader 
or set up as a private limited company.  A very small proportion of new businesses set up as a 
partnership and a small proportion of small businesses grow to become public limited companies.  
Sole traders 
Most businesses in the UK are small businesses, owned and operated by one person. In most cases, 
these businesses operate as a sole trader. 
Look at Yell.com or Yellow Pages (a local free business listing posted through your letterbox). You will 
see lots of examples of people operating as a sole trader in your area.   Many traders in the service 
sector e.g. hairdressers, gardeners, plumbers and electricians, use the sole trader option, as do people 
who run part-time or seasonal businesses. 
A sole trader is a popular form of business organisation, as it is simple and cheap to set up and operate. 
Most importantly the sole trader gets to keep all the profits! The sole trader, also takes all the risk and 
has unlimited liability, as already discussed. 
Do not forget that a sole trader can and do employ other people to work in their business! 
Partnerships 
A partnership is formed where a business is started and owned by more than one person. Common 
examples of partnerships are doctors, solicitors or vets.  
A legal document called a Partnership Agreement is always recommended and sets out how the 
partnership is run, which covers areas such as: 
• How profits are to be shared 
• How much each partner has to invest into the business 
• How decisions are to be taken 
• What happens if a partner wants to leave the partnership or dies 


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 46  
The partners own the business and have unlimited liability. 
Private limited company (Ltd) 
A company is formed when a business is set up to have a separate legal identity from its owners.  In the 
vast majority of cases, the type of company created is a private limited company (ltd). These are very 
common and can include small and very large businesses. There are many well-known examples of ltd 
companies, such as Iceland, Virgin, John Lewis and Clarks shoes. 
If a business becomes a private limited company, it can raise funds from investors, such as friends and 
family, but not from the general public, as its shares are not listed on the stock exchange. Every private 
limited company must have at least one shareholder. Any money raised from new shares is 
permanently invested in the business. 
In this type of business, the company's finances are separate from the owner’s personal finances.  The 
owners are known as shareholders, who each own shares in the company. They receive a share of the 
profits, known as a dividend, as a reward for being a shareholder. These are paid in proportion to the 
number of shares that they own. If the company goes bankrupt, shareholders are protected by limited 
liability.  
The business will be run by a Board of Directors, appointed by the shareholders. The shareholders may 
also act as the directors. The Board of Directors runs the company on a day-to-day basis and makes all 
the important decisions. 
Comparing limited companies with sole traders and partnerships  
The main differences between the different types of business ownership can be summarised as follows:  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Sole trader  Quick and easy to set up – the 
business can always be 
transferred to a limited company 
once launched 
 Simple to run – owner has 
complete control over decision-
making 
 Decision-making is quick, 
important in changing, fast 
moving markets with lots of 
competition 
 Owner gets to keep all the profits 
 Minimal paperwork 
 Full personal liability i.e. 
“unlimited liability” 
 Harder to raise finance – sole 
traders often have limited funds of 
their own and few assets against 
which to raise loans 
 The business is the owner – the 
business suffers if the owner 
becomes ill, loses interest etc 
 Limited life as the business is the 
owner – lack of continuity 
 Stressful – long hours, no division 
of labour, no support with 
decision-making 
Partnership  Quite simple for two or more 
people to form a business 
together 
 Minimal paperwork once 
Partnership Agreement set up 
 Partners can provide specialist 
knowledge and skills 
 Jobs can be shared, so less 
 Unlimited liability  
 Partners have to live with 
decisions of others; a poor 
decision by one partner damages 
the interests of the other partners 
 Decision-making can take longer, 
as disagreements can occur 
 Harder to raise finance than a 


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 47  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
stressful than operating as a sole 
trader 
 Greater potential to raise finance 
compared to a sole trader, as each 
partner provides investment 
 Any losses will be shared 
company 
 Short life, as if one partner leaves 
or dies the partnership ends 
 Profits have to be shared 
Private 
Limited 
company 
 
 Limited liability - protects the 
personal wealth of the 
shareholders 
 Easier to raise finance as can sell 
shares 
 Stable form of structure – the 
company continues to exist even 
when shareholders change 
 Original owners are likely to retain 
control  
 Shareholders have to agree about 
how profits are distributed 
 Greater administrative costs than 
setting up as a sole trader or 
partnership 
 Finance limited to “friends and 
family” 
 Less privacy - public disclosure of 
company information, but not as 
extreme as for a plc 
 Directors’ legal duties are stricter 
Choosing the most suitable legal structure for a business 
There will be several factors that will influence the type of structure chosen by a business: 
• Size of business – start-up businesses often start as sole traders, as they are easier and quicker 
to set up compared to a Ltd. There is less paperwork involved. 
• Type of business – some business structures relate to the type of good or service provided. If 
specialist expertise is involved such as doctors, vets or lawyers they are more likely to be 
partnerships than sole traders. If significant risk is involved, the business is more likely to 
become a private limited company. 
• Lender requirements – if a bank loan is needed to start a business, the bank may prefer a small 
business to be set up a sole trader or partnership, to make sure they can be paid back by the 
individuals if the business fails. 
• Investment protection – a private limited company may be chosen, so the investors in a new 
business or an expanding business can be protected by limited liability. 
• Control – the owner, as a sole trader or a shareholder, holding the majority of shares in a 
company, has total control of the business. This is shared in a partnership and at risk in a 
company with a minority shareholding. 
Franchising 
A business idea for a start-up does not have to be original. Many new businesses are formed with the 
intention of offering an existing business idea.  The use of franchises is a great example of that.  
The basic idea for a franchise is this.  A franchisor grants a licence, the franchise, to another business, 
the franchisee, to allow it to trade using the brand or business format.  There will be restrictions on the 
franchisee regarding its goods or services and its sources of materials, but it is a low risk and relatively 
low cost of option that does allow a franchisee to have some independence and freedom. 
Remember that the franchisor is in charge - the franchisor is the original owner of the business idea. 


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 48  
Franchises are a significant and increasing part of business life in the UK.  Based on the BFA/NatWest 
franchise survey (2015) here are some quick statistics that illustrate this fact: 
• Percentage of units profitable (including new businesses): 97% 
• Franchises generated annual sales of £15.1 billion in the UK in 2015, selling through 44,200 
franchised outlets, employing 621,000 people 
• There are over 901 different franchisor brands in the UK, with new franchise ideas becoming 
available every year 
• Average turnover or revenue continues to rise; in 2015 over half had an annual turnover of more 
than £250,000 
• Start-up costs may not be too expensive and can be as little as £10,000 and are typically about 
£50,000 
• In 2015, over 97% of franchises, including new businesses, were profitable 
• Franchises are particularly popular in the service (tertiary) sector.  Franchises offering property 
services, for example estate agency, cleaning, gardening, food etc are the most popular 
Examples of well-known businesses that use franchising to expand their operations include: 
• Subway 
• McDonalds 
• Starbucks 
• Pizza Hut 
• Thorntons 
• KFC 
• Europcar 
 
You might have noticed from the list above that nearly all those businesses provide services rather than 
produce goods.  Franchising is particularly suitable for service businesses. 
Advantages of running a franchise 
For a start-up entrepreneur, there are several advantages to investing in a franchise: 
 It is still the franchisee’s own business – even if they are paying royalties to the franchisor! 
 The investment should be in a tried and tested format and brand 
 The franchisee gets advice, support and training.  The franchisor will also supply key equipment, 
such as IT systems, which are designed to support the operation of the business 
 It is easier to raise finance - the high street banks have significant experience of providing 
finance to franchises 
 No industry expertise is required in most cases 
 The franchisee benefits from the buying power of the franchisor 
 It is easier to build a customer base – the franchise brand name will already be established and 
many potential customers should already be aware of it 
 The franchisee is usually given an exclusive geographical area in which to operate the franchise – 
which limits the competition, since operators of the same franchise are not in direct competition 
with each other 
Overall, investing in a franchise is a lower risk method of starting a business and there is a lower chance 
of business failure. 


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 49  
Disadvantages of running a franchise 
There are several disadvantages for the franchisee: 
 Franchises are not cheap!  The franchisee has to pay substantial initial fees and ongoing royalties 
and commission.  He/she may also have to buy goods directly from the franchisor at a mark-up 
 There are restrictions on marketing activities, for example not being allowed to undercut nearby 
franchises, and on selling the business 
 There is always a risk that the franchisor will go out of business 
 The franchise needs to earn enough profit to satisfy both the franchisee and franchisor - there 
may not be enough to go round! 
There are many good franchise opportunities available for a start-up, but some poor ones too. There is 
therefore, still a need for the entrepreneur to conduct market research into the franchise before 
deciding to invest in one. 
A franchise is a kind of "halfway house" for a keen entrepreneur. It is a lower risk method of entering a 
market and it is often easier to raise finance.  However, running a franchise does not offer the same 
kind of long-term financial rewards that owning a business outright can. 
Business location 
Where to locate is an important decision for all organisations. This is especially true however, for a new 
business. Should it be based at home or located in a nearby office, shop or industrial unit? How will new 
technology impact on this decision? 
Location is also important for existing or growing businesses. Should they stay where they are? Do they 
need bigger premises? Would it be an advantage to relocate to somewhere else, either in this country 
or to a different country? Can the business use modern technology to create a “virtual business,” so 
that its employees are all working from home? 
Not every kind of start-up business can be based at home.  For a new coffee shop, for example, a strong 
location is vital to ensure enough customers visit the store. 
One of the most important considerations about location for any business will be cost. A start-up 
business is likely to have limited financial resources and therefore will want to minimise its set-up costs, 
whereas an existing business is likely to have competitors and will want to keep costs low, in order for it 
to have the opportunity to compete more effectively on price. Having premises will mean that a 
business will have to pay rent, rates, insurance and many other ongoing costs, as well as the rental 
deposit or purchase costs. 
Other factors determining location 
Whatever the business, there are several general factors, in addition to cost, that influence the choice 
of location. These are: 
Raw materials The business may depend on supplies of a particular raw material, so costs will be 
lower if the business is located near the supplier, for example where the raw 
material is grown or where a distributor is based. This factor tends to be more 
important for primary and manufacturing businesses, rather than businesses in the 
tertiary (service) sector. 


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 50  
Labour When a start-up business needs to hire employees, then access to a reliable supply 
of skilled staff will be important.  Businesses that are labour-intensive often look to 
locate in areas of traditionally low wages or higher unemployment, although this will 
depend on the skill level that the business needs and the availability of this type of 
worker. This factor is important for all businesses, but may be less significant if the 
business uses a lot of machinery. 
Market - 
customers and 
population 
Businesses may need to be located near particular centres of population.  For 
example, if the product is targeted at a particular type of customer, for example 
older-aged people, then it is important to be located where they live. This is 
particularly important for businesses in the tertiary sector, as they provide a service.  
Government 
assistance 
This may be available to set up in a particular location. These “assisted areas” are 
considered to be the poorer parts of the country and may have less wealthy 
customers. They may however, have cheaper labour available. Assistance may come 
in the form of grants, loans, reduced tax burdens or use of government owned 
buildings. 
Communications This includes transport facilities (road, rail, air), as well as information and 
infrastructure.  Transport links are particularly important if the business delivers 
products, uses a sales force or depends on imports and exports to function.  The 
continued popularity of e-commerce makes transport links increasingly important, 
to ensure products can be delivered to customers in a timely manner. Information 
technology is less of an issue these days, as even new businesses can normally have 
fast and reliable broadband internet connections. 
Competition All businesses need to be aware of where their competitors are based when 
deciding on their own business location. This is particularly important if the business 
is providing a service. If a new business sees a “gap in the market” where there is no 
competitor, this might be a good reason to locate there. However, this might mean 
that this is not a profitable location for any business.  
In some cases it may be of benefit to be near a competitor, as customers may come 
to the competitor, but see another business that is nearby. This can be seen with 
the popularity of retailers located in retail parks or clothing stores being clustered 
together in shopping centres. 
There is no magic formula which can be applied in deciding the most important factors in choosing a 
location.  Sometimes the convenience of the location for the entrepreneur will be more important than 
even cost considerations.  
The type of business (primary, secondary or tertiary) will also be important as primary industries will 
need to be located where their raw materials are and many tertiary businesses will need to be near 
their customers for the service to be provided. Manufacturing businesses will be influenced by many 
different factors such as availability of materials and labour, as well as distribution to their customers.   
The short term and long term objectives of the business can also be significant, for example, will a 
business have enough room to expand if it needs to increase output in the future? 


===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 51  
Marketing mix 
Introduction to the marketing mix 
The marketing mix consists of four elements and represents the way in which a business uses the 
following four factors to reach customers: 
 Product - the good or service that the customer obtains 
 Price - how much the customer pays for the product 
 Place (distribution) – how the product is distributed to the customer 
 Promotion - how the customer is found and persuaded to buy the product 
It is known as a “mix” because each ingredient affects the others and the mix must overall be suitable to 
the target customer. 
For example: 
• High quality materials used in a product can mean that a higher price is obtainable 
• An advertising campaign carried out in one area of the country, promotion, requires distribution 
of the product to be in place in advance of the campaign to ensure there are no disappointed 
customers 
• Promotion is needed to emphasise the new features of a product 
 
An effective marketing mix is one which: 
• Meets customer needs 
• Achieves the marketing objectives 
• Is balanced and consistent 
• Allows the business to gain an advantage over competitors 
The marketing mix for each business and industry will vary; it will also vary over time. 
For most businesses, one or two elements of the mix will be seen as relatively more important than the 
others, as illustrated below: 
 



===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 52  
 
Changes to the marketing mix 
A good example of how changes take place over time is the use of e-commerce. Whereas the retail 
outlets for electrical goods used to be very important, nowadays price and how quick and conveniently 
delivery can be arranged is much more critical in getting a sale. Digitial communication has also changed 
many aspects of promotion, with the extensive use of websites and social media now playing a critical 
part of even a small business’s marketing plans. 
The popularity of online and price comparison sites have also made pricing more visible. Consumers are 
now able to compare very quickly different prices, reviews about the good or service, and then make an 
informed choice about which product to purchase within a matter of minutes. This means that 
businesses have to constantly be aware of the information being displayed on their wesbite, as to 
whether it is up to date and effective. 
Customers’ needs and wants will always be changing. This can be seen in the “keep fit” market, where 
new products are constantly being developed, launched and promoted. The Fitbit for example, is priced 
relatively high and has expensive promotion to support the product and the price. This often makes it 
difficult for small businesses to compete, which is why they will need to look carefully for a gap in the 
market or operate in a market niche where there are less competitors. 
Business plans 
In order to be successful businesses will need to plan. In most cases, this will be through the creation of 
a business plan. A well-used and famous saying is “failing to plan is planning to fail”.  
What is a business plan? 
A business plan is a written document that describes a business, its objectives, its strategies, the market 
it is in and its financial forecasts.  The business plan has many functions, from securing external funding, 
to measuring success within the business. 
Although a start-up business will need a business plan, the existence of such a document will also be 
important for an existing business. In this case the plan might be for a longer period and will need to be 
reviewed on a regular basis.  
Information that should be included in a business plan 
A simple business plan is suitable for a start-up business and is written by the entrepreneur. It 
summarises the key aims and targets of the business and the actions required to achieve them. The plan 
will include areas such as: 
• The idea - a simple description of the proposed business with its location 
• Where the idea came from and why it is a good one 
• Objectives and key aims for the business - sales, profit, growth (gives a sense of direction for the 
business) ideally for the next 3-4 years 
• Finance required and sources of finance - how much from the owners, how much to be loaned 
over how long and from whom 
• Market overview – results of market research, main segments, target market, market size (value, 
quantity), growth, market share of main competitors (if known) 


===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 53  
• How the business will operate (location, premises, staff, distribution methods) 
• Marketing mix – description of these four elements 
• Cash-flow forecast (important to ensure the business does not run out of cash)  
• Forecast revenue, costs and profits 
The purpose of business plans 
The main reasons why a start-up business should produce a business plan are: 
• Provides a focus on the business ideas - is it really a good one and why? 
• Produces a document that helps clarify thoughts and identify any gaps in information or 
research 
• It encourages the business entrepreneur to focus on what the business is really about and how 
customers and finance-providers can be convinced to buy and lend the business money 
• It helps test the financial viability of the idea by including forecasts of revenue, costs, profits and 
cash-flow 
• A business plan will minimise the risk of failure - can the business achieve the required level of 
profitability and not run out of cash? 
• The plan provides something which can be used to measure actual performance 
• A business plan is essential to raising finance from outside providers, such as investors and 
banks, as it will provide evidence that any loans can be repaid 
In addition existing small businesses will use this process: 
• to review their current performance  
• allows business objectives to be modified if required 
• allows departments of the business to produce their own plans, for example marketing plan, 
human resources plan.  
• to update their current business strategy or plans for the future, based on their current 
performance, changes to the business environment, over which they have little control, and 
revise objectives 
• overall it will help the business make informed decisions 
  


===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 54  
1.5 - Understanding External Influences on a Business 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware how the local and national business 
environment might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this topic’s relationship with 
the other topics in this theme and how this might affect decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
Business stakeholders Main business stakeholders and their objectives 
How stakeholders impact and are impacted by business activity 
Stakeholder conflict 
Technology and business Different types of technology that businesses use 
How technology influences business activity 
Legislation and business Purposes and principles of consumer legislation 
Purposes and principles of employee legislation 
Impact on businesses of meeting and not meeting legislation 
requirements 
The economy and business How businesses are affected by the economy and changes to key 
economic variables  
External influences How businesses are subject to external change and how it influences 
their business activity 
 
Business stakeholders 
A stakeholder is anyone who has an interest in the activities and decision-making of a business.  
Stakeholders include: 
• Shareholders or business owners 
• Managers and employees 
• Customers 
• Suppliers 
• Banks and other finance providers 
• Government 
• Local community 
• Competitors 
• Pressure Groups 
Various factors affect how many stakeholders a business has and the strength of their interest and 
influence on the business. These factors include: 
The size and scale of the business: for example, a small, sole-trader service business will have relatively 
few stakeholders.  Contrast this with a much larger, complex business like a national supermarket chain, 


===== PDF PAGE 56 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 55  
which has thousands of employees operating in numerous locations and is an important customer to 
hundreds of suppliers. 
The nature of the good or service:  some products are more likely to attract the attention of 
stakeholders. For example, a manufacturing business that has high levels of carbon emissions or waste 
packaging will be scrutinised much more closely than a simple service business.  The local community 
will have a greater interest in a business that is a major local employer than in a one-man band. 
Objectives of business stakeholders 
The main objectives of each main stakeholder group will not always be the same as the objectives the 
business sets for itself. The objectives of the more important stakeholders to a business can be 
summarised as follows: 
Stakeholder Mainly interested in… 
Shareholders/owners • Good return on their investment 
• High level of profits and dividends 
• Success and growth of the business 
• Proper running of the business (if shareholders are not directly involved 
in the day-to-day running of the company) 
Managers and 
employees 
• Rewards, including maximising basic pay and other financial incentives 
• Job security and good working conditions  
• Promotion opportunities 
• Job satisfaction and status through high levels of motivation, interesting 
roles and responsibilities 
• Success of the business 
Customers • Value for money 
• Product quality that meets their specific needs 
• Appropriate levels of customer service 
Suppliers • Fair or high prices and prompt payments 
• Continued profitable trade with the business 
• Financial stability – can customers pay their bills? 
Banks and other 
finance providers 
• Profitability and cash-flow for the bank 
• Low risk that the business will not be able to repay finance provided  
• Growth in profits and value of the business  
Government • Prompt and correct collection and payment of taxes, for example VAT, 
income tax 
• Creating jobs, for example through businesses succeeding and growing 
• Compliance with business legislation, for example health and safety, 
minimum wage/national living wage compliance, consumer protection, 
fair trading, environmental protection 
Local community • Success of the business – particularly creating and retaining jobs 
• Compliance with local laws and regulations, for example noise, pollution 
Competitors • Profitability and success for their own business 


===== PDF PAGE 57 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 56  
Stakeholder Mainly interested in… 
• An increase in market share 
Pressure Groups • These could include trade unions and environmental groups 
• Best deal for their members, for example trade unions will push for 
higher wages, environmental groups will want safeguards to prevent 
business activity damaging the environment 
How stakeholders are affected by business activity 
Any activity of a business will affect some, if not all of its stakeholders. The impact will differ dependent 
on the particular stakeholder group. In many cases, the impact will be positive for some stakeholders 
and negative for others.  
Example: If a business decides to relocate to a location that will be more convenient for customers, this 
will have different effects on different groups of stakeholders. Customers will benefit, the owners will 
also benefit, as the profits are likely to increase. Employees might lose their jobs or be forced to 
relocate, so the effect on them will be negative and one local community will lose, whilst the other local 
community gains in terms of job and therefore wealth creation.  
It should be noted that the effect on stakeholders might be different in the short term and long term. A 
decrease in wages for workers might be negative in the short term, but might ensure that the business 
remains competitive and survives, which will mean that the workers’ jobs will be preserved in the long 
term. 
Impact of stakeholders on business activity 
The behaviour of stakeholders will be influenced by their objectives, as previously described, and in 
turn, this will impact on the activities of the business. 
Example: Employees want higher pay. This means they will negotiate with the managers to get a better 
deal, possibly threatening strike action if they do not get a pay rise. If they are successful, then this will 
increase the costs of the business. This may result in the business having to increase its prices to 
maintain its profit level. However, this might not be possible if there are competitors, so the profits 
earned by the owners or shareholders will decrease, as prices will need to stay the same in order for the 
business to remain competitive. 
All stakeholders can impact business activity. If suppliers insist on immediate payment, this will make 
the business’s cash-flow more difficult to manage. If the owners want short-term profits, they may 
prefer a high price strategy rather than a low price, high growth option.  
Why might the objectives of stakeholders be in conflict? 
Many business objectives are shared by a broad range of stakeholders. 
For example, an objective for a business start-up of achieving survival would be supported by nearly all 
the stakeholders.  Other than its competitors, it is unlikely to be in anyone’s interest for a business to 
fail. 
However, once a business becomes better established and larger, then potential conflicts begin to arise. 
Let’s look at two examples in a little detail: 
Business expansion versus higher short-term profit: 


===== PDF PAGE 58 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 57  
An objective of increasing the size and scale of a business might be supported by managers, employees, 
suppliers and the local community – largely for the extra jobs and sales that expansion would bring.   
However, an expansion is often associated with increased costs in the short-term, for example extra 
marketing spending, new locations opened, more production capacity added.  This might result in lower 
overall profits in the short-term, which may cause conflict with the business shareholders or owners, 
who may want high profits and high rewards for being a shareholder in the form of dividend payments 
now and therefore would not be prepared to wait for rewards.  
However in the longer-term, most business owners will be in support of expansion, particularly if it 
increases the overall value of the business. 
Job losses versus keeping jobs 
This was a big issue for many businesses during the recent economic downturn.  In order to reduce 
costs and not spend cash, business managers made some staff redundant or introduced other measures 
like short-time working to reduce wage costs.  This will have been supported by business owners and 
managers.   
However, it created a potential conflict with stakeholders such as employees (who were directly 
affected), the local community (affected by local job losses) and suppliers (which suffered from a 
reduction in business). 
Here are some other potential causes of conflicts between stakeholders: 
• “Short-term” thinking by managers who want to maximise profits today, may discourage 
important long-term investment in the business which would increase owners profits in the long 
run 
• Investing in new machinery to achieve better efficiency to raise profits for the owners, may 
result in job losses 
• Extending products into mass markets to increase sales and profits for shareholders  may result 
in lower quality standards for consumers 
 
Technology and business 
In recent years there has been a revolution in how businesses can benefit from new technology. The 
invention and widespread use of computers and mobile phones has allowed massive changes to the 
way businesses operate and how they communicate. It has also redefined markets for many businesses 
and how they conduct their buying and selling operations. Digital technology is an overall term used to 
include all aspects of computer use and can be applied to most areas of human life from its use in 
education and health, to its use by government and business. 
E-commerce 
Businesses have been using computers for over thirty years. Originally computers were used mainly for 
the storage of data and the production of documents, but as technology has developed, the amount of 
uses for information and communication technology (ICT) has increased to include stock control and 
production technologies, such as computer aided design (CAD) and computer aided manufacturing 
(CAM). 


===== PDF PAGE 59 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 58  
The revolution in the use of computers has taken place since the invention of the worldwide web, which 
has allowed computers to be linked both nationally and internationally. Combined with the use and 
availability of mobile phones and smart phones, this has created a new digital world where businesses, 
customers and employees can all benefit from cheap and affordable technologies. 
In the last twenty years, the buying and selling of goods through e-commerce has grown rapidly. This 
has included auction sites and internet retailers, as well as high street retailers developing internet sites. 
There have been many benefits of e-commerce to its users, but one of the most important is it allows 
access to wider markets. 
The table highlights the advantages and disadvantages of e-commerce. 
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Businesses  Can sell products and services 24 
hours a day, 7 days a week 
 Costs can be reduced, as no need for 
retail premises 
 Market can be expanded on a national 
and international basis 
 Quality will be improved, as 
businesses will be under constant 
scrutiny, as customers can easily 
compare one business’s products to 
another through reviewing online 
feedback; only the best value for 
money goods and services will be 
chosen resulting in an increase in 
efficiency 
 Processing of orders is fast and 
delivery can be quick and in line with 
customer expectations; delivery can 
also be tracked 
 Data recording and analysis is easily 
achieved; can help with targeted 
promotional activity 
 Pure play or e-tailers can locate in less 
expensive areas of the country, where 
land is not of a premium price 
 No personal contact with 
customers, so more difficult to 
influence sales on an individual 
basis  
 ICT systems have to be 
established, maintained and 
updated which can add to costs 
and lead to customer 
frustration if unreliable 
 Distribution costs can increase 
rapidly through increased 
geographical spread of sales 
 Increased competition, as 
businesses can make products 
available on an international 
basis 
 Not all customers have internet 
access; some customers are 
afraid of fraud and therefore 
will not trade electronically 
 Providing a good customer 
service, including return of 
products purchased, can be 
expensive 
 
Customers  Allows customers to shop from the 
comfort of their own home at a time 
when it is convenient 
 Cheaper prices and better quality due 
to competition 
 Availability can be checked, which 
means no wasted journeys to shops 
 Choice is increased, as products can be 
selected from anywhere in the world 
 Product details and reviews are 
 Customers cannot see or try 
goods before purchasing them; 
returning goods can be 
inconvenient or expensive 
 Possibility of personal details 
being used for fraud or for 
unwanted advertising 
 Delays in delivery compared to 
high street shopping, where 
goods are available immediately 


===== PDF PAGE 60 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 59  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
available, including from other 
customers 
 No hard sell from employees; 
customers are free to choose and buy 
products that best suit them 
 
 Potential customers, with no 
internet access, may lose out on 
choice 
Communities 
 
 Growth of new job opportunities in 
providing e-sales centres, distribution 
outlets and transport networks 
 Increased sales in associated 
industries, such as technology and 
communication 
 Local and national economic benefits 
from businesses who are successful; 
individuals with higher disposable 
incomes, due to now being in 
employment, will spend this income in 
other businesses, creating a multiplier 
effect  
 Loss of traditional retailers from 
high street shopping areas and 
retail parks, due to an increase 
in competition  
 Increase in products from other 
countries that have cheaper 
costs, resulting in the loss of 
direct and indirect jobs from an 
economy 
 
Social media 
Most businesses will now either be using, or at least be aware of, Twitter and Facebook. Social media 
provides an unrivalled number of direct contacts for communication – said to be 2 to 3 billion potential 
customers worldwide. It is also not expensive to set up and to operate at a basic level. Most social 
media sites allow data collection of users. 
Marketing and promotion in particular, can be considerably expanded through the use of social media, 
although small and new businesses may find it hard to establish a following just using a Facebook page. 
There are an enormous number of similar businesses using similar methods. Social media is often linked 
to the business website, but provides a more up to date “newsy” type of information or blogs. 
Other areas of the business can also benefit, for example the business may well link some recruitment 
strategies to social media options and sites such as LinkedIn can provide a CV sharing platform. 
Digital communication 
Digital communication is now in widespread use throughout the world. This includes all devices such as 
mobile phones, tablets, fax machines and video conferencing equipment. It has enormous applications. 
Digital communication can also happen through social media platforms. 
The use of digital communication and digital technology can be applied to all stakeholders. Some 
specific examples are as follows: 
• Customers – ordering, invoicing or sending bills, customer service, advertising 
• Suppliers – ordering, payments, product information 
• Employees – payslips, job information, booking holidays, checking hours to be worked 


===== PDF PAGE 61 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 60  
• Shareholders – annual reports, dividend information and payments 
In addition, e-mail could be used for communication to all stakeholders, to share relevant information 
that is appropriate to the individual stakeholder needs. 
Specific advantages and disadvantages of using digital communication to a business are listed in the 
table: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Cheap to operate and widely used. 
Messages and data can be transmitted 
quickly and is increasingly possible 
throughout the world 
 May be unreliable and no guarantee that 
messages will be received or accessed by 
the person intended to receive them 
 Data and messages can be stored 
electronically, so saves cost of storage. Can 
be saved digitally and backed up using 
cloud storage 
 Can lead to communication overload, as 
more messages are created and more 
information is received and sent. Important 
messages and emails may be lost or 
delayed 
 Possible to produce translated versions 
using online applications  
 Equipment may not work and not all places 
will be connected 
 Teleconferencing and videoconferencing 
are possible, which can produce 
considerable time and cost savings 
 Environmental and health concerns over 
electronic transmission 
 High quality advertising and marketing 
messages are possible through high 
definition graphic and video images 
 Lack of leisure time, as employees 
expected to be available longer hours and 
when on holiday 
  Constant training requirement for staff to 
understand how to use digital 
communication efficiently 
Payment systems 
Technology has been used by businesses for a long time. The paying of staff directly into their individual 
bank accounts has been used well before the internet was developed. The use of the internet has 
accelerated the use of e-payments, to such an extent that in many countries it has overtaken the use of 
cash within the country. This does however, vary considerably between different countries.  
One of the first uses of internet payment systems was for businesses to pay suppliers through direct 
banking payments, either on a one off or regular basis. Similarly businesses can collect payments from 
customers in a similar way. Methods such as standing orders, direct debits, debit cards and credit cards, 
now represent the “normal” way for many businesses to collect payments from customers, with 
contactless pay being the most recent development. 
The growth of e-commerce has been linked to the use of electronic payment and firms, such as PayPal, 
have developed to make this process easier and safer. Mobile payments are also now becoming used on 
a much wider basis and Apple Pay and Android Pay are examples of a new level of customer friendly 
applications to set up and make payments. 


===== PDF PAGE 62 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 61  
There are many advantages to a business of having technology based payment systems. These include: 
 Lower costs 
 Quicker receipt of money 
 Happy customers who find it convenient 
 No need for cash to be kept or used 
Electronic payment does however have its critics, normally on the basis of security. There have been 
well publicised examples of fraudulent use of banking details and this concern is still the main reason 
why some customers will not use digital payment systems. Disadvantages can therefore be summarised 
as follows: 
 Cost of buying and using payment systems 
 Customers resistance to use of payment systems 
 Not all customers may have access to required technology 
 Risk of fraud 
How businesses are affected by the use of technology 
Every business area can make use of digital technology. Ignoring the pace of change is not an option 
even if in the short run it may be disruptive and expensive, as competitors which do use the technology 
will become more efficient. Those businesses that continue to use old technology will be left behind and 
may not survive. For a small business lack of knowledge, awareness or finance in this area can be a real 
problem. 
Some examples of how technology influences and is used in business activity are: 
Sales – the use of e-commerce, whilst providing many benefits, has also brought a constant need for 
businesses to keep up to date with payment methods and consumer preferences. This will be expensive 
and time consuming to entrepreneurs who are generally very busy. 
Costs – financial recording is now predominantly computer based, with various software packages 
available. Digital applications are also used for electronic billing and payments. Many firms will also use 
programmes for financial modelling and monitoring linked to management information systems which 
are used to provide this data to managers and owners. Software packages are available that are suitable 
for small businesses, but they are often expensive. 
Marketing mix – Digital technology can be used directly in terms of e-commerce and websites. 
Marketing also makes other widespread use of computers in terms of product design, advertising, social 
media and its use of customer databases, which is often linked to market research. Setting up, 
managing and developing technology based promotion are all possible for a small business. However, 
there is a need for entrepreneurs to understand its benefits and afford its costs. 
There will be other uses of digital technology within even a small business and production, human 
resources and the organisation of administration will all make considerable use of the opportunities 
that it provides. 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 63 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 62  
Legislation and Business 
Governments introduce legislation in many areas of the economy. This is done to control businesses 
that otherwise might put profits before looking after its customers or treating its employees fairly.  It 
also ensures a fair system, as all businesses in the UK have to meet the same requirements. 
Consumer Laws 
Consumer Rights Act 2015 
This law provides consumers with significant protection when it comes to dealing with businesses. All 
start-up and small businesses, as well as larger businesses, have to ensure that they comply with this 
legislation. The Consumer Rights Act covers product quality, returning goods, repairs and replacements, 
digital content and delivery rights. 
The main requirements include that: 
Goods must fit their description 
• E.g. organic wine really must be organic 
• Businesses need to take care with descriptions – avoid inaccurate claims 
 
Goods and services must be of satisfactory quality 
• The test is whether a “reasonable person” finds them to be satisfactory 
• Goods must work and have no significant defects 
Goods are fit for the purpose specified 
• E.g. a watch should tell the time 
• Businesses should take care when explaining what a product can be used for 
The Trade Descriptions Act 1968 
The Trade Descriptions Act makes it an offence for a trader to make false or misleading statements 
about goods or services. It carries criminal penalties and is enforced by Trading Standards Officers, 
making it an offence for a trader to: 
• apply a false trade description to any goods  
• supply or offer to supply any goods to which a false description has been applied 
• make false statements about the provision of any services, facilities or accommodation 
The Consumer Rights Act and the Trade Descriptions Act are the two main two acts that exist to protect 
consumers. However, consumer protection under the law goes much further.  For example: 
• Businesses may not use unfair commercial practices, for example misleading advertising or 
pressurised selling. 
• Customers have a right to return and be provided with a full refund if goods/services do not 
comply with the law. 
• Services must be completed at a reasonable price and by the time stated.  The customer can 
request that unsatisfactory work be repaired or carried out again at no cost. 


===== PDF PAGE 64 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 63  
• Since October 2008, consumers buying from home or at work have the right to a “cooling off 
period”. This means if a customer orders a product, such as a mobile phone, by phone or online, 
he/she has 14 days to decide whether he/she wants to keep it or not. 
Effects on business 
There will be costs that businesses will need to pay, for example in terms of increased quality control, to 
make sure that they obey consumer law. There will however, be many benefits to a business of ensuring 
that they do comply with these laws, such as gaining an improved reputation in the marketplace, which 
could lead to an increase in sales, and avoiding bad publicity. 
Breaking any of these laws can lead to a business incurring costs of repair and replacement, increased 
administration costs, as well as gaining a bad name in the market. It can also lead to very high fines for 
the business, which can run into millions of pounds.  
Employment Law 
Equal pay and minimum wage laws 
The basic rule for all businesses in the 2010 Equality Act UK is that: 
Men and women are entitled to equal pay for work of equal value 
… Looking at that rule in a little more detail: 
• “Pay” includes everything in the employment contract - bonuses and pension contributions, as 
well as basic wages or salary 
• Workers have the right to ask their employer for information to check equality – using the equal 
pay questionnaire 
• If employees believe their pay is unequal, they can take the employer to an employment 
tribunal 
Employees must be paid at least the national minimum wage (NMW) by law. Since April 2016, if staff 
members are aged 25 or over, they must be paid at least the national living wage (NLW). The NMW and 
NLW are reviewed and usually changed every year. The rates as at October 2016 and April 2017 are 
shown in the table: 
 
Source: https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates 
 
Effects on business 



===== PDF PAGE 65 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 64  
The effect of wage legislation on many businesses is often that their wage costs will increase, although 
some businesses will choose to pay above these levels, to attract a higher calibre of staff. They may also 
choose to pay higher than the minimum levels to increase staff motivation and reduce labour turnover. 
This will reduce recruitment costs and increase productivity levels within the business.  
Firms which do not pay minimum wages can face significant fines, as well as receiving bad publicity, 
which will make future recruitment more difficult and may reduce sales. 
Discrimination 
Discrimination is the treatment in an unacceptable way of anyone who is termed to be different.  In 
the UK, it is illegal for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the basis of: 
• Sex, including pregnancy and maternity  
• Marital/civil partnership status  
• A person's disability  
• Race  
• Age  
• Sexual orientation  
• Religion/belief  
• Trade union membership or non-membership  
• Status as a fixed-term or part-time worker 
Discrimination laws apply in many areas of employing staff, for example: 
• Recruitment  
• Employee contract - terms and conditions  
• Promotions and transfers   
• Providing training 
• Deciding which fringe benefits employees receive 
• Employee dismissal   
Employment rights 
An employment right is something to which an employee is entitled, which is protected by law. Laws 
provide a variety of “rights” for employees, including: 
• Reasonable notice before dismissal 
• Right to redundancy 
• Right to a written employment contract 
• Right to request flexible working 
• Right to be paid the national minimum or living wage 
• Right to take time off for parenting 
Health and Safety 
The Health and Safety at Work Act (1974) gives employers the duty to ensure, as far as it is possible, 
the health, safety and welfare at work of all their employees. 
The act requires for example: 
• safe operation and maintenance of the working environment, plant and systems  


===== PDF PAGE 66 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 65  
• maintenance of safe access to and around the workplace  
• safe use, handling and storage of dangerous substances  
• adequate training of staff to ensure health and safety  
• adequate welfare provisions for staff at work 
In terms of health and safety, management must remember that it is not just concerned about 
protecting staff – health and safety applies to any person who comes into contact with the business.  
That means that proper health and safety needs to be provided to: 
• Employees working at the business premises, from home, or at another site  
• Visitors to the premises, such as customers or subcontractors  
• Employees working at other premises where their business is working, such as on a construction 
site  
• Members of the public - even if they are outside the business premises  
• Anyone affected by the products the business designs, produces or supplies 
For most start-up or small businesses, complying with health and safety does not pose too many 
problems, although the business will incur additional costs to ensure that it complies with the law 
properly. For example, there could be staff training costs on relevant health and safety matters, 
providing appropriate equipment and clothing to staff and lost management time spent checking that 
the business is obeying all aspects of the law. In some industries however, health and safety is really 
important, for example: 
• Food processing (hygiene) 
• Hotels (guest safety, hygiene) 
• Chemical production (dangerous processes, waste disposal) 
• Air travel (passenger safety) 
• Tour operators (holidaymaker safety)  
 
Effects on business of Health and Safety Law 
Many businesses will often say that meeting health and safety requirements can be expensive and make 
them uncompetitive, especially if they face competition from firms in other countries where there are 
less health and safety requirements. However, failure to meet health and safety requirements can result 
in unlimited fines and imprisonment.   
Businesses will also benefit from a safe working environment, as staff will stay working for the business 
and will be happy and more motivated in what they are doing. This will increase productivity levels. 
Businesses will also find it is easier to recruit new employees, if a vacancy arises.   
 
The economy and business 
Governments will all have well established economic policies designed to influence and control how the 
economy operates in their country. They will have aims such as low inflation, high employment, 
increased production and a balance in international trade. The policies used to achieve these objectives, 
which include interest rates and taxation, will all affect businesses both directly and indirectly through 
their effects on consumers and employees. 
Level of employment and unemployment 


===== PDF PAGE 67 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 66  
Governments will be aiming to have high employment (and low unemployment) in their economy, so 
there will be less people reliant on benefit payments. There are, however, advantages and 
disadvantages to businesses of high levels of employment. These are summarised in the table: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Incomes will be higher, so spending on 
goods and services will increase, 
particularly on non-essential items 
 Workers will be more motivated, as they 
have more job security, increasing 
productivity levels and efficiency 
 
 Fewer workers will be available, resulting in 
new job vacancies being difficult to fill 
 Wages and salaries are likely to increase, as 
fewer workers are available; new and 
existing workers can demand higher pay 
 Increased staff turnover, as it easy for 
workers to move jobs, increasing 
recruitment and training costs 
High unemployment will result in the reverse of the above points and may also cause workers’ skills to 
be lost, particularly in industries using technology. 
There will also be considerable regional variation within a country in terms of employment levels. This 
may encourage businesses to relocate to take advantage of the opportunities that this provides, directly 
through an increase in the amount of available labour or indirectly through government relocation 
grants and subsidies. Some businesses will benefit more than others, depending on whether their goods 
or services are targeted at consumers with high or low incomes. 
Growth and consumer spending  
An increase or decrease in consumer incomes will affect how much money consumers spend and what 
they spend their money on.  
An increase in spending will mean that consumers will purchase more goods and services. Although this 
is an opportunity for local, domestic businesses, they will need to produce more or consumers will buy 
from other countries that may be quicker to expand production and fulfil customer needs more 
efficiently. If production cannot increase to meet customer demand, there is a possibility that increased 
consumer spending might lead to prices rising and inflation taking place. When a decrease in consumer 
spending occurs, the above effects are reversed. 
When an increase or decrease in income levels happens, consumers will purchase different goods and 
services. For example, when there is an increase in income levels, businesses that produce luxury goods 
and services will do very well. Businesses that produce more basic products might see a decrease in 
demand, even though overall customer spending is increasing. This is because customers may switch 
from buying lower priced products, such as Tesco value beans to buying a branded product, such as 
Heinz beans. Demand for some products however, will remain near enough constant, despite changes 
in income levels. Examples of these products include bread, milk and eggs, as they are seen as necessity 
items.  
Inflation 
Inflation is a prolonged period of rising prices in an economy. The UK economy has had very low 
inflation for many years. If inflation were to increase this would mean that the prices of goods and 
services would increase and there would normally be corresponding increases in wage rates, so that 
consumers could afford the higher prices. 


===== PDF PAGE 68 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 67  
The effect of inflation on business can therefore be seen in two parts: costs and demand. 
Increased costs – wage costs and the cost of materials will rise. This can prove difficult for businesses, as 
they will always want costs to reduce. It can lead to pay disputes with workers or a decrease in quality 
of materials purchased in order to save money.  
Increased prices – the increased costs will be passed onto the customers. This may reduce demand as 
consumers find cheaper products from goods imported into the country. Some consumers will also not 
have an increase in their wages. The increased prices might also cause a fall in demand if they sell their 
products to other countries, which have lower or no inflation. 
As well as the additional work involved in managing inflation, there is always the risk of a wage – price 
spiral  where wage increases lead to price increases which lead to further wage increases and so on. The 
inflation rising out of control will damage most businesses in an economy. 
Taxation 
Taxation will affect businesses directly and indirectly. Firstly businesses will be taxed on their profits. 
This is known as income tax for a sole trader or partnership. A company pays corporation tax which 
affects all business with revenue of over £300,000 a year. The rate at which businesses are taxed has 
been reduced in recent years to encourage businesses to stay in the UK rather than moving to other 
countries, which may tax profits at lower rates.  
Businesses will also be affected by taxes on consumer income and expenditure. Direct taxes on 
consumers include income tax. If this increases then consumers will have less money to spend, so 
businesses will suffer (see consumer spending). There are also indirect taxes that consumers pay on 
their spending, VAT being the most important. 20% is currently added to the price of most goods and 
services. Changes to VAT are used by the government to encourage or discourage consumer spending. 
Interest rates 
In recent years, interest rates have been very low in the UK.  Any change overall or in the direction of 
interest rates, can influence consumer and business behaviour considerably. An increase in interest 
rates may cause the following to happen: 
Direct effects: 
• Business loans will be more expensive. This will discourage investment and may mean 
businesses become less competitive or are reluctant to expand 
• Costs may increase, as the cost of existing loans/overdrafts may be higher, dependent on the 
terms of the borrowing 
• Businesses may choose to save money to earn the higher interest, rather than spend it 
Indirect effects: 
• Consumers will spend less, as it is more expensive for them to borrow money to fund 
expenditure 
• Consumers will also spend less, as they will be more inclined to save more if interest rates are 
increasing 
• Consumers may also spend less, as their costs on existing debts, such as loans and mortgages, 
may increase, meaning they have less disposable income to spend on other purchases, 
particularly non-essential goods and services, such as going to the cinema. Certain businesses 
will therefore see a drop in sales, revenue and therefore profit 


===== PDF PAGE 69 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 68  
• The exchange rate may increase, making the costs of goods sold by businesses to other countries 
more expensive 
Exchange rates 
Where businesses trade with other customers and suppliers in other countries, they will need to take 
into account the value of that country’s currency. This exchange rate and changes to this exchange rate 
will affect the prices that have to be paid and the amount that can be earned from overseas trade.  
Imports are goods and services that are purchased from other countries. These might be raw materials 
or finished products or services purchased by consumers. Exports are goods and services sold to 
businesses and consumers in other countries.  
If the exchange rate changes so that the currency appreciates, then it will be worth more. This means 
that it will cost more for businesses located outside of the UK to buy the UK currency or pound sterling. 
It will also be cheaper for businesses located in the UK to buy another country’s currency. This means 
that imports into the UK will be cheaper and exports will become more expensive.  
As a result if a country’s currency is appreciating then it is: 
• bad for a business that exports, as its goods will become more expensive in the countries that it 
sells its goods in, so sales will decrease 
• good for consumers, as prices of imports will decrease and they can get different and cheaper 
goods and services 
• good if a business imports raw materials, as the business will be able to buy more of these raw 
materials for the same UK converted price. This will reduce business costs, which would give it 
more flexibility with pricing. This is very important if the business operates in a competitive 
market, as a reduction in prices could result in an increase in sales, which if costs are controlled 
could lead to an increase in profits  
• bad for a local business that may not be able to compete against the cheap imports 
If a currency depreciates than it will be worth less (devaluation) and be cheaper for other countries and 
businesses to buy. This is often seen as a disadvantage to a country, but in reality there are some 
businesses which will gain from this situation and others that will lose, which can be described as 
follows: 
• good for a business that exports, as its goods will be cheaper so sales might increase  
• bad for consumers, as prices of imports will increase, so they will have to spend more to get the 
same imported goods and services 
• bad if a business imports raw materials, as it may increase its costs which might cancel out the 
benefits of cheaper export prices 
• good for local businesses, as they will be able to compete better against cheaper imports  
Fluctuations in exchange rates cause uncertainty in business and will impact on business decision-
making. Since Brexit, the pound sterling has fallen in value, which has resulted in exports becoming 
cheaper, but imports becoming more experience. Changes in the exchange rate such as this, might 
discourage businesses from trading internationally, as it will impact on the profits that a business 
makes.  


===== PDF PAGE 70 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 69  
These effects are often summarised using the word SPICED: 
S trong 
P ound 
I mports 
C heaper 
E xports 
D earer 
 
 
The importance of external influences  
External influences are very important for all businesses, but this is particularly so for a small or new 
business, as these influences, and changes to them, are outside the control of a business. Businesses 
will however, be affected by these factors and have to react to them. A good business will also be 
looking to the future and anticipating any changes and how they best should prepare for them. These 
changes can be local, national or international. For example, how will a business be affected if interest 
rates rise? Or if the large factory nearby closes? Or the minimum wage is increased significantly? 
Successful businesses are those businesses that are prepared and have a plan in place for these 
changes. 
In order to summarise the way external influences can result in changes of business strategy and 
planning we can consider a few examples on a small independent hotel business: 
External change Impact on business Reaction of business 
Increase in income tax 
rates 
 Business costs increase and 
consumer income decreases  
 Reduced demand for goods and 
services, dependent on the nature 
of the product, for example there 
would be less demand for luxury 
goods 
In the example set, the business may see 
a drop in demand from wealthier 
customers, as they can no longer spend 
their income on short breaks, but must 
spend their income on their mortgage 
• Short term price 
reductions to fill hotel 
• Some staff reductions to 
save costs 
• Advertisements in other 
countries as possible new 
markets  
New anti-pollution law All businesses need to recycle higher 
percentage of waste materials.  
 Costs increased and profits 
decrease 
• Room prices to customers 
increased, dependent on 
rivals 
• Other cost savings made in 
reducing staffing, less 
marketing and less training 


===== PDF PAGE 71 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 70  
External change Impact on business Reaction of business 
Increase in e-shopping 
using mobile phones 
 Drop in sales booked through 
reception and loss of sales to 
other hotels that were quick to 
adopt online bookings through 
mobile phones 
• Investment in e-sales and a 
website which is 
compatible with smart 
phones 
• Daytime hotel reception 
staff made redundant 
• Price reductions for online 
bookings 
 
 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 72 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 71  
Theme 2 – Building a business 
2.1 Growing the Business 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must also appreciate this topic’s 
relationship with the other topic areas in this theme and how this might affect business decision-
making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business growth Methods of growth: internal and external 
Public limited companies 
Sources of finance for growing and large businesses: internal and 
external 
Changes in business aims 
and objectives 
Reasons why business aims/objectives change over time 
How business objectives change over time 
Business and globalisation Impacts of globalisation 
Barriers to international trade 
Competing internationally: e-commerce and the marketing mix 
Ethics, the environment and 
business 
Ethics versus profit 
Environmental considerations and sustainability 
Pressure group impact on the marketing mix 
 
Business Growth 
Most businesses want to expand – to grow sales, increase profits, add new locations or extra outlets 
and take on more staff.  However, expansion is not always easy; nor is it the most appropriate option 
for some businesses, for example those businesses that operate in a very specific niche or specialist 
market, which does not allow for growth. 
What do we mean by expansion?  In general, expansion is about making the business bigger.  However, 
business size can be measured in different ways and this should be remembered when determining 
whether a business is growing or not. Listed below are different ways that business growth can be 
determined:  
• Are sales increasing? 
• Is the amount of profit generated going up? 
• Has the capital invested in a business risen? 
• Is the volume or output produced rising? 
• Are there an increasing number of employees working for the business? 
• Is the number of outlets or locations the business operates in growing? 


===== PDF PAGE 73 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 72  
• Is the value of the business going up (market capitalisation: current share price x number of 
shares issued) 
• Is the market share getting bigger? 
 
A useful way to compare and contrast the options for business expansion is to think in terms of internal 
(organic) and external (inorganic) growth.  These options will be possible for most businesses and many 
will do both. 
Internal or organic growth 
Internal or organic growth can be defined as: 
“expansion from within a business by expanding the number 
 and/or range of products and/or locations” 
Internal or organic growth builds on the business’s own capabilities and resources.  For many 
businesses, this is the only expansion method used.  Internal growth involves approaches such as: 
- By designing and developing new product ranges  
- Changing the marketing mix to launch existing products directly into new markets, for example 
exporting. This can also be linked to an introduction or development of e-commerce  
- Opening new business locations – either in the domestic market or overseas  
- Investing in research and development to support new product development and innovation 
- Investing in additional production capacity or new technology to allow increased output and 
sales volumes 
- Training employees to help them acquire new skills and address new technology 
Business growth case studies 
Just Eat Just Eat was set up in 2001 and has grown rapidly. It is now the world’s leading 
marketplace for online food delivery, operating in 12 countries. They provide a service 
linking the consumer with local take aways, serving everything from pizza to sushi to 
burgers to burritos! They have grown rapidly with the ability to order online. Their 
advertising has focussed on smart phone applications with the slogan “just a tap 
away”. This has resulted in consumers being able to order online from their favourite 
local take-away, even if it is a small sole trader business, creating a clear example of 
internal or organic growth through e-commerce and advancements in technology. 
Aldi In 2017, Aldi overtook the Co-op as Britain’s 5th largest supermarket chain. Its 
marketing mix aims to provide high quality, own branded products at the lowest 
possible price. Aldi’s innovative “Like Brands” and “Swap & Save” marketing 
campaigns, which included the use of emails, have improved customer opinion of Aldi. 
These campaigns have also increased Aldi’s sales per store by +100% over 3 years, 
through the creation of more loyal customers. Its advertising and social media 
campaigns have also created positive feedback and encouraged new customers to try 
out Aldi as a supermarket. 
Premier Inn Hotel chains, such as Premier Inn, continue to report strong growth which is spreading 
from London to other UK cities, such as Birmingham, Leeds and Edinburgh. Demand 
has increased from both the business and leisure sectors throughout the UK and 
investment in new hotels and hotel refurbishments is at record levels. This shows a 


===== PDF PAGE 74 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 73  
clear example of internal or organic expansion through the opening up of new hotels. 
Apple Apple is one of the biggest companies in the world. It has grown rapidly over the last 
ten years and its turnover represents 1.25% of the sales revenue of the whole US 
economy. By investing 30% of its budget in research and development (2016), Apple is 
able to continually bring out new versions of its existing iPhones, iPads and iMacs. This 
has not only encouraged existing customers to upgrade their current devices, but also 
creates new customers, often switching from rival products. Apple has also been able 
to develop new products, such as iWatches and virtual reality developments, to 
continue fuelling its growth. 
Yorkshire 
Pianos 
Yorkshire Pianos was set up in 2012 to fill a gap in the market for British made pianos. 
The pianos, which are made in Yorkshire under the Cavendish brand, quickly became 
successful and with imported piano prices increasing, sales in the firm grew rapidly. In 
2014, the company visited the Shanghai Trade Show. It was very popular and in 2016, 
Yorkshire Pianos started to export its products to China, with the typical customer 
being a family with at least one child learning to play. British pianos have a distinctive 
tone, being more “mellow” than the brighter sounding brands, such as Yamaha.  
Keep a look out for these kinds of business stories and other individual business case studies. Add them 
to your notes. Has the business achieved internal or organic growth by adding new products, expanding 
into new geographical areas or increasing its share of the market? 
Advantages and disadvantages of internal or organic growth 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of internal or organic growth? Here is a summary: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Less risky than taking over other businesses   Growth achieved may be dependent on the 
growth of the overall market  
 Can be financed through internal funds, for 
example retained profits 
 Harder to build market share if business is 
already a leader  
 Builds on the strengths of the business, for 
example the brand 
 Slow growth – shareholders may prefer 
more rapid growth  
 Allows the business to grow at a more 
steady rate 
 Retained profits may be used to finance 
internal growth; this may increase the risk, 
as there is less left “just in case” the 
business needs money quickly at another 
point in time. This also means there would 
be less to distribute to shareholders or 
owners  
External or inorganic growth 
In order to speed up its growth, many businesses choose a strategy of external or inorganic growth and 
expand through mergers or takeovers.  
Takeovers are where one business buys a controlling interest in another. For a company, this would 
mean buying over half of the shares in that company. These might be agreed by the company being 
taken over, but in some cases it is not and is therefore known as a hostile takeover. The firm being 
taken over will cease to exist and its staff and resources will be owned by the business making the 
takeover. 


===== PDF PAGE 75 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 74  
Mergers are where two businesses agree to join together to make a new business. 
Takeovers and mergers happen for many different reasons and the two firms involved may be 
competitors to each other, suppliers or customers to a business, or the businesses involved may have 
related, or in fact unrelated, products. 
Advantages and disadvantages of external or inorganic growth 
 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Benefits from economies of scale, 
decreasing the cost of producing each 
unit 
 Diseconomies of scale can occur if a business 
becomes too large, resulting in an increase in 
the cost of producing one unit 
 Reduced competition and increased 
market share allowing a business to 
have more security and to possibly 
increase prices 
 Resentment and clashes of culture may occur 
between different businesses, which may 
reduce the effectiveness of the merger or 
takeover 
 Risk is spread if products are different to 
the core product 
 May need to make some workers redundant, 
especially at management level, which can 
reduce motivation 
 The two businesses may allow a transfer 
of knowledge, skills and/or technology. 
Goods and services can be shared  
 The cost savings may not be easy to achieve 
quickly, as staff will need to be made 
redundant and premises and equipment sold 
 Larger businesses may be able to raise 
money more easily and have more 
buying power to get cheaper raw 
materials 
 The firm making the takeover may not have 
enough knowledge of the other business to 
make the new business successful 
 Costs might be saved as the businesses 
might have duplicated facilities, for 
example headquarters, outlets in the 
same places 
 If a business grows too large or too quickly it 
may become inefficient in terms of 
management and worker motivation 
Examples of mergers and takeovers 
As you look through the business media you should come across many examples of mergers and 
takeovers: 
Facebook & 
WhatApp 
In February 2014, Facebook bought messaging app “WhatsApp” in a deal worth 
a total of $19bn (£11.4bn) in cash and shares. WhatsApp has more than 450 
million monthly users and is popular with people looking to avoid text messaging 
charges. WhatsApp gives Facebook Zuckerberg inroads into international 
markets and, as importantly, to a younger demographic.  
Microsoft & LinkedIn In June 2016, Microsoft bought the business-focused social network LinkedIn for 
$26.2bn (£18.5bn) in cash, its biggest ever purchase. The takeover was agreed 
by both companies. Microsoft said that acquiring the LinkedIn network would 
give it a competitive advantage and fit well with its business-focused software, 


===== PDF PAGE 76 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 75  
such as Office.  
Heinz & Kraft In March 2015, H.J. Heinz Co, famous for its ketchup and baked beans, merged 
with Kraft Foods, famous for macaroni and cheese in a box, as well as brands, 
such as Maxwell House coffee. This change created the third-largest US food 
company. The deal meant each share was exchanged for one share in the new 
combined company, plus a cash dividend of $16.50 per share. Heinz 
shareholders own 51% of the shares, Kraft shareholders the rest. 
Public limited company (plc) 
Most of the largest businesses in a country will be public limited companies. Famous examples of public 
limited companies based in the UK include Unilever, Tesco ad GSK. 
Plcs are complicated and expensive to set up, but this type of company can raise large sums of money 
through listing its shares on the stock exchange for the public to buy. Buyers of plc shares may be 
financial institutions and investment or pension funds, or they may be just ordinary members of the 
general public. The key fact to remember is that, in theory, “anyone” can become a shareholder in a 
public limited company, unlike in a private limited company, where there is more control over who is 
allowed to become a shareholder in the business. 
Trading on the stock exchange makes it easier to value and to buy and sell shares in a plc. The trading of 
shares in this way can however, make the company vulnerable to a possible takeover. This could mean 
that the original owners/shareholders of the company can lose control, if they end up holding less than 
50% of the shares.  
A plc must have at least two shareholders and at least £50,000 of share capital. The Board of Directors 
is, like a private limited company, appointed by the shareholders. There is however, more of a 
separation of roles between shareholders, directors and those who manage the company on a day-to-
day basis in a plc. 
Advantages and disadvantages of public limited companies  
 
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Public Limited 
Company 
 Limited liability – protects the 
personal wealth of the 
shareholders 
 Can raise large sums of finance 
via the stock exchange, which is 
permanently invested in the 
business 
 Stable form of structure – 
business continues to exist even 
when shareholders change 
 Firm is more prestigious and 
can receive lots of publicity 
 Shareholders may not agree 
with how the profits have been 
distributed or undistributed by 
the board of directors in the 
business 
 Greater administrative costs 
 Finance can be limited by the 
stock market valuation of the 
company 
 Public can see company 
information and accounts 
 Risk of company being taken 
over 
 Separation of ownership and 
control 


===== PDF PAGE 77 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 76  
Sources of finance for growing and established businesses 
Growing businesses or large businesses have access to a greater number of sources of capital or finance. 
One reason for this is they are viewed as less risky, as they are larger and therefore would have more 
assets to act as security against a loan for example, and therefore there is less danger that a public 
limited company would not be able to successfully make repayments. 
 
These sources of finance can be divided into internal and external sources: 
Internal sources of finance 
The main internal sources of finance for an established or growing business are: 
• Retained profits 
• Selling assets 
Retained profits 
Retained profit is by some way the most important and significant source of finance for an established 
profitable or growing business. 
The idea is simple.  When a business makes a net profit, the shareholders have a choice: either extract it 
from the business, by way of a dividend, or reinvest it by leaving profits in the business.   
Some of these profits might be in the bank; some might be spent on additional property and machinery; 
perhaps some are reinvested in more inventory or used to reduce bank overdrafts or loans. 
Retained profits have several major advantages: 
 They are cheap, though not free, as the cost for shareholders of leaving profits in the business is 
the return they could have obtained elsewhere i.e. through investing. 
 They are very flexible – management have complete control over how they are reinvested and 
what proportion is kept rather than paid as dividends. 
 They do not dilute the ownership of the company. 
There are however some disadvantages of using retained profits: 
 Directors of large, profitable businesses are sometimes criticised for having lower dividends 
because they are keeping too much cash in the business.  If retained profits do not result in 
higher profits, then there is an argument that shareholders could make better returns by having 
the cash for themselves! 
Selling assets 
Selling spare or unwanted non-current assets, such as spare land, buildings, machinery or equipment, 
that are no longer needed by the business, can result in extra finance being generated on a one off 
basis.  
 Using this method will mean that no finance needs to be repaid and the business owners keep 
full control of the organisation. 
 It is however, unlikely to be a long-term solution for most businesses that need to raise finance, 
as money will be raised on a one-off basis. This method will also reduce the value of the 
business, as the business will no longer own these assets. 


===== PDF PAGE 78 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 77  
The sale of assets often occurs when management grow the business through mergers and takeovers.  
The combined businesses may have excess assets which can then be sold to raise finance. 
External sources of finance 
There are many ways for a larger business to raise finance from external providers. The main methods 
are: 
Loan capital 
The two main types of bank finance are overdrafts and loans. 
Bank overdrafts 
Businesses of all sizes use bank overdrafts as a means of finance.  As a business gets bigger, it often 
finds that its overdraft facility also needs to grow.  That is because an overdraft is essentially a short-
term source of finance that is available to help fund the day-to-day payments required by a business. It 
allows the business to withdraw funds from its account that are not there, up to an agreed maximum 
limit and is only used when the business requires additional, temporary amounts of money. 
 The big advantage of a bank overdraft is its flexibility. If a business experiences a short-term 
shortage of cash or an unexpected cost, then it can be paid by using some of the overdraft 
facility.  Interest is only paid on the amount used. 
 The main downside of an overdraft is that it is repayable to the bank at any time. A business may 
have an overdraft facility of £100,000 i.e. it can owe the bank up to that amount, but the bank 
may lower or even withdraw that facility at any time.  This happened to numerous businesses 
with bank overdrafts during the credit crunch of 2007-8, many of whom were relying on their 
overdraft to stay in business.  
 The other drawback of an overdraft is that they usually have high levels of interest attached to 
them, making them an expensive form of finance when they are used.  
Bank loans 
A bank loan is an amount of money borrowed for a set period within an agreed repayment schedule. 
The repayment amount will depend on the size and duration of the loan and the rate of interest.   
Many businesses use bank loans to finance their business activities.  However, bank loans tend to be 
more available for well-established and growing businesses, rather than start-up businesses.  The 
reason for this is risk – banks prefer to loan to successful businesses, which makes them more likely to 
be able to repay the loan and interest. 
If a bank loan can be obtained then there are several advantages for a growing business: 
 The business is guaranteed the money for a certain period - generally three to ten years (unless 
it breaks the loan conditions). 
 Loans can be matched to the lifetime of the equipment or other assets the loan is for. 
 While interest must be paid on the loan, there is no need to provide the bank with a share in the 
business, so no control is lost. 
 Interest rates may be fixed for the term, making it easier to forecast interest payments and cash 
flow. 
 Repayments are made in instalments, resulting in the business having access to substantial 
amounts of cash that does not need to be paid back all in one-go.  
There are also some disadvantages of a bank loan: 


===== PDF PAGE 79 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 78  
 Security - normally has to be given to the bank on some of the assets of the business.  The bank 
will have control over these assets if the business fails. 
 Lack of flexibility - a growing business might take a loan out for £500,000 but finds it only 
needed £300,000.  That means that interest is being paid on £200,000 of loan that it does not 
need. 
 Interest – interest must be paid on the loan amount, which increases the costs of the business. 
Share capital 
Both private and public companies can raise finance by selling new shares in the company.  For the 
purpose of this section, we concentrate on the main options open to a publicly-quoted company – i.e. a 
company whose shares are quoted and traded on a recognised stock exchange. 
The two main options available are: 
Flotation – new issue of shares 
A flotation is a way that a company can raise large sums of money for a new or existing business. It 
involves selling shares in the company to investors through the stock market.  A stock market flotation is 
an expensive way of raising new capital because of the costs involved in the sale of the shares. 
The major change that arises from a flotation is that the shareholder base of the company becomes 
much wider; potentially many thousands of private shareholders invest in the business alongside the 
larger “institutional” investors, such as pension and insurance scheme funds. 
Rights issue 
A rights issue is a relatively common way for a company to raise fresh capital.  The company issues new 
shares, offering them first to existing shareholders. Shares in a rights issue will often be offered at a 
significant discount to the current market price, particularly if the shareholders’ “appetite” for the 
shares needs to be encouraged. 
What is the best source of finance for a growing or large business? 
With such a wide range of potential sources of finance, the truth is that there is no such thing as the 
ideal or recommended source of finance for a large or growing business. Several factors determine the 
type and amount of finance that a growing business needs.  The most important of these are: 
Factor Explanation 
Profitability A business that has strong profitability is often able to finance expansion 
through reinvesting profits, rather than looking for external finance. 
Management track 
record 
External finance providers, for example banks and venture capitalists, will look 
closely at the abilities and experience of the business management team.  They 
do this to determine the risks involved in providing finance. 
Short or long-term The nature or reason for the finance is a key consideration.  If finance is 
required for long-term growth, for example to pay for a new warehouse or 
factory, then that would support the use of bank loans or share capital (long-
term sources) rather than bank overdrafts or trade credit (short-term sources). 
Legal structure A public company has the option of raising finance via public stock markets.   


===== PDF PAGE 80 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 79  
Changes in business aims and objectives 
As a business grows, its objectives may well change. Established businesses will also expect to change 
their objectives if the external environment is different. A business specialising in luxury products might 
aim for strong growth in an economy that is doing well, but may have to change this to survival if the 
economy weakens or a strong new competitor arrives. 
Objectives are often set in financial terms.  Those could include: 
• How much profit the business wants to earn 
• The targeted level of sales for the next year 
• How fast the business wants to grow, for example percentage increase in sales 
• How much profit is to be paid out to shareholders in dividends 
However, business objectives do not have to be expressed in money terms, or in a way that can be 
measured. Some objectives are hard to quantify, but are often important.  For example, an objective a 
business might set may be to become recognised as… 
• An innovative player in the market 
• A leader in the quality of customer service (compared with the competition) 
Both of these objectives do not have obvious quantitative measures. 
Changes to objectives 
There will be various causes of a business choosing or having to change its objectives. This could be due 
to internal reasons, such as a change in ownership, for example The Body Shop was taken over by profit 
maximising L’Oreal, which would/may conflict with the ethical objectives of The Body Shop. New 
directors/managers could also want the business to expand in a particular direction, for example 
through international expansion. There will also be changes to the business environment which a 
business cannot control, but will affect the achievement of a business’s objectives.  
Some examples of how internal and external influences could affect a business are summarised here: 
Cause of 
change 
Explanation  Example of effect on the 
business and the 
achievement of its objectives 
Possible new objective 
Market 
conditions 
The current situation in 
the market that the 
business operates in e.g. 
economic conditions, 
competition, changing 
tastes and fashions 
If there is increased 
competition or decreased 
consumer wealth, this could 
mean increasing sales may be  
unachievable 
Objectives may change 
from growth to survival 
or in reverse if market 
conditions improve 
Change in 
technology 
Advances in technology 
such as new IT capabilities 
New technology could 
significantly reduce costs, 
making it easier for a business 
to increase profits 
Objectives such as 
reducing staffing levels 
could be introduced to 
reduce costs to pay for 
the new technologies 


===== PDF PAGE 81 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 80  
Cause of 
change 
Explanation  Example of effect on the 
business and the 
achievement of its objectives 
Possible new objective 
Change in 
legislation 
New laws introduced such 
as changing the minimum 
wage, or shops charging 5p 
for carrier bags 
The new laws could affect 
sales, employment or 
production and may increase 
costs or decrease revenue 
Profit targets reduced 
because of the 
increased costs caused 
by the new legislation 
Internal 
reasons 
Internal factors such as 
management capability, 
availability of employees 
or the financial position 
could all change  
If there are less employees 
available then costs might 
increase to retain staff or to 
pay for overtime, reducing 
profits 
If the managers cannot 
cope with the 
expansion aimed for 
due to a lack of 
expertise of staff, then 
the business might stop 
trying to grow and 
reduce its product 
range 
Businesses will always be changing and adapting to change. This will be due to some of the changes 
identified above and how the business itself evolves over the years. New managers may bring in fresh 
ideas. Managers may therefore have to adjust objectives to take into account internal and external 
changes, including particularly the performance of the business. 
There will always be a clear sequence: 
Existing objective 
Change causing factor 
Effect on current business objective 
New business objective 
Globalisation 
In recent years, the world has increasingly become one market. The introduction of new technology, 
economic development and improved travel have all meant that businesses can consider selling their 
products anywhere in the world. Trade between countries is now much more important than it ever has 
been and as a result, there has been an increase in free trade agreements between countries. 
Globalisation also affects decisions regarding business location. Businesses can either be completely or 
partly based outside of their own/home country.  
Multinational firms, businesses that produce goods in more than one country, have become increasingly 
powerful as worldwide brands. 
There have been huge advantages to businesses of global trading, but there have also been many 
challenges and adjustments that have had to be made to the way businesses now operate: 


===== PDF PAGE 82 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 81  
Globalisation – Benefits and Drawbacks 
 
Benefits Drawbacks 
Globalisation has resulted in increased markets for 
businesses small and large through exporting. Use 
of e-commerce and better distribution has made 
global markets a reality for many businesses. 
Businesses can also find cheaper raw materials 
and production opportunities through imports. 
Where countries have a cost advantage in the 
production of a good or service, they have been 
able to specialise in its production and sell 
throughout the world at cheaper costs. This could 
be due to easier access to raw materials, climate 
advantages or skilled labour. Globalisation has 
therefore impacted where different businesses or 
industries locate. 
Because there is more competition, firms have had 
to become more efficient, which has resulted in 
consumers having more choice at lower prices of 
better quality or designed products. 
 
With international cooperation and global trade, 
there has been an increasing transfer of 
knowledge and skills throughout the world. This 
has led to increased use of technology and more 
efficient production. 
Domestic firms have had to face competition from 
businesses throughout the world through imports. 
Many of these businesses have cheaper costs and 
larger scale production and as a result other 
businesses may close. 
Multinational firms have become very powerful 
with their global brands. 
Some complete industries have closed and this has 
caused a need for new businesses to be 
established and training for the unemployed 
workers whose jobs no longer exist. There is no 
longer coal mined in the UK, so all the miners have 
had to find other jobs.  
 
In the UK there has been a decrease in skilled 
manufacturing and an increase in the service 
industry. This has led to changes away from 
manual skills to managerial and in many cases low 
level service jobs. 
 
An economy is now vulnerable to world economic 
conditions. If there is a change in the economic 
situation in one country, this will affect many 
other economies.  A downturn in the economy of 
the USA will cause the UK economy to also suffer, 
as export sales to the USA decrease. 
 
Barriers to international trade 
Economic theory would say that all countries can benefit in the long run if there is free trade between 
them. This means that imports and exports can be exchanged between countries with no barriers to 
trade in existence, such as tariffs, quotas (a restriction on the amount of goods that can come into a 
country) or regulations. Barriers to trade is where a government imposes regulations to restrict the flow 
of international products into its country. 
In reality, countries will prioritise the short term needs of their own economy, which means barriers to 
trade are often implemented. There are many reasons for this practice, such as allowing domestic new 


===== PDF PAGE 83 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 82  
industries to develop, protecting jobs from foreign competition and retaliating against other countries 
that are also protecting their economy through similar measures. 
Tariffs are one of the most common methods used to restrict trade. They are a tax on imports and will 
allow the businesses which produce similar products within the home or domestic country to grow, or 
at least to survive, against foreign competition. They can allow businesses to adjust to these new 
threats, but equally may encourage inefficiency. Tariffs will also reduce consumer choice and increase 
the price of products.   
Trade blocs, such as the European Union, offer the opportunity for free trade within the group of 
trading nations. They are likely however, to charge high tariffs on imported products from countries 
outside of the trading bloc, so consumers once again can suffer through restricted choice and higher 
prices. Because of this, businesses which export to countries outside of the trading bloc may face 
restrictions, such as tariffs and quotas, on their exports to these countries. At times, if a business 
exports heavily to a particular country or trading bloc, it may open a site within that trading bloc to 
avoid these barriers to trade. 
There are benefits to consumers of the existence of trading blocs, for example cheaper products from 
countries within the trading bloc and to businesses which export within the bloc, although they will still 
face competition from other businesses. 
International competition for UK businesses 
UK businesses face both the challenges and opportunities of the global market, as described previously. 
This has been made more complicated by the Brexit vote, which means that traditional trading links 
within the EU will change when the UK leaves the EU.  This will affect both UK firms which export to 
other EU countries, as well as UK firms which compete against imports from the EU. There will 
undoubtedly be new markets through new trade deals with non EU countries, but equally there will be 
new firms seeking to enter the UK market, which will pose a threat to existing UK producers. 
There are many areas where the UK is a world leader and these tend to be where innovation and design 
are important. Science and technology has been a traditional strength, but the UK is also acknowledged 
as a market leader in many areas of industries, including automotive, aerospace and chemical and 
pharmaceuticals. 
Internet and e-commerce 
The availability of the internet has allowed businesses to expand their horizons on a worldwide scale. 
Whilst this would not be suitable for some types of businesses or their products, there will however, be 
a large number of businesses that now sell or produce their products on a global scale. Even small or 
growing businesses can promote, sell and distribute their products using digital communication and e-
commerce. 
Example: Freestyle Xtreme 
Freestyle Xtreme is a specialist UK based company that sells sports clothing and accessories, particularly 
those for extreme sports. The firm decided to expand internationally using Amazon for on-line sales and 
payments. Freestyle Xtreme’s website was first launched in 2004. The business has now developed its 
own online sale sites and uses online market places in many other countries. Its sales revenue has risen 
to £10 million in 5 years. Payments are immediate, through internet based systems, and the UK 
government has encouraged the business by providing financial help towards its distribution costs. 


===== PDF PAGE 84 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 83  
International marketing 
Traditionally, the four main methods of selling into international markets have been 
• Exporting direct – the business stays in the UK and sells directly to the customer in other 
countries 
• Using overseas distributors and agents – the business uses other businesses or individuals 
(agents) who are based in other countries. They help sell the products, as they know the market, 
in return for a percentage of the price. This practice is very common in the car industry, where 
the manufacturers use “dealers” to sell their cars. 
• Setting up overseas business units – the business will set up a factory in another country to 
make the product, which might be slightly different due to local preferences. 
• Buying a business overseas – a merger or takeover of an overseas firm allows a business to 
“buy” the production unit and to carry on selling to their existing customers. 
 
Online advertising and e-commerce are now making direct exporting a much more cost-effective 
option.  International customers find it relatively easy to discover the products offered by firms of all 
sizes in the UK and complete transactions.  
 
There are however, several changes that businesses will need to consider if international marketing is to 
be successful. 
 
Marketing Aspect International considerations 
Product Are tastes and expectations the same in other countries? Fashions might not be 
the same, climates will vary, cultures will provide different influences and even 
the electrical system might be different. 
Product names and brands might mean something different in other countries. 
There are many well-known examples of this including Coca-Cola’s first 
translation into Chinese as “bite the wax tadpole!”  
Price Income levels in other countries might be very different, even after taking into 
account the exchange rate. Often basic western consumer goods are luxury 
products in other countries and will have a relatively high price compared to local 
alternatives and therefore will only generate low sales. 
Promotion Advertisements and packaging will require translation – websites will need to be 
understood in the countries targeted. Different legislation will need to be 
observed, as well as respecting the cultural norms of other countries. Media used 
will need to be understood, if advertising is to be placed in other countries. 
Place Distribution will clearly need careful checking, both in terms of speed and cost. 
International payment is not straightforward. There are also issues to do with 
trade restrictions, such as tariffs, which might mean there is an additional cost to 
exporting to other countries. 
 
There will continue to be many new challenges for UK businesses in a post Brexit era. Globalisation will 
not go away and it will be those UK businesses that continue to take the initiative and look to the 
opportunities it provides that will succeed. 


===== PDF PAGE 85 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 84  
Ethics, the environment and business 
In recent years, business stakeholders have taken a much greater interest in the wider aspects of 
business behaviour. These include consideration of ethics, the environment and issues to do with 
sustainability and global warming. 
Business ethics 
Business ethics is concerned as to whether businesses have morally correct behaviour. This can be 
applied to its relationship with suppliers, employees, customers, but will also be relevant to its 
relationship with the wider community. An ethical decision will be one that is based on what is morally 
right, rather than the most profitable option. Ethics should not be confused with the law. A decision 
might be unethical but legal, or ethical and illegal. 
Making an ethical decision may result in increased costs for a business. It may however, lead to good 
publicity and a more positive relationship with its stakeholders. In some cases, ethical behaviours or 
choices will be made because of the moral viewpoint of the business owners, not just because it will 
increase profitability in the long term! 
Some examples of unethical business behaviour are given in the table, together with the impact that 
these decisions could have on the business itself: 
Stakeholder Example Comment 
Consumers Should a business charge very 
high prices where consumers 
have no choice of product? 
Businesses might get extra profits in the short 
run, but its reputation might suffer and new 
competitors could take its trade in the future 
 
Employees Businesses might pay low wages 
and provide poor and unsafe 
working conditions 
Workers may choose to leave the business; 
recruitment may be difficult and the business 
might face industrial action from trade unions. 
Legal action could be taken against the firm, if 
they are not meeting the requirements of the 
law; any fines that result could be expensive and 
the firm’s reputation could be damaged 
Suppliers Cheap suppliers might be using 
unethical practices in the 
production of their goods, such 
as using child labour, paying 
cheap prices or using bribes  
Use of suppliers which exploit their workers can 
cause bad publicity, which may reduce sales; 
businesses are increasingly held accountable for 
the actions and decisions of the suppliers that 
they use 
Community Ignoring local communities by 
polluting the local area 
Avoiding pollution might prevent an increase in 
costs and may improve the reputation of the 
business, increasing sales and making it easier 
for the firm to recruit workers. Ignoring pollution 
issues would have the opposite effect on the 
business 


===== PDF PAGE 86 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 85  
Fair Trade is a scheme that some businesses agree to. This shows that producers and retailers are being 
ethical in the way they purchase goods and raw materials from developing countries. They pay higher 
prices, so that the workers in the developing countries can receive higher wages and experience a 
better standard of living. 
Advantages and disadvantages of ethical behaviour 
There are arguments for and against ethical behaviour. A business may feel the need to act ethically, 
particularly if a business faces competition from firms in other countries:  
Advantages Disadvantages 
• Sales might increase due to good publicity 
• Improved brand reputation 
• Employees like working for the business; 
easier to recruit and retain staff 
• Meets owners objectives 
• Costs may increase and profits decrease 
• Publicity may not persuade consumers to 
buy 
• Quality or appearance of products may not 
be as good 
Many of these decisions and examples represent a trade-off between ethical behaviour and increased 
profit. Overall, business decisions will be based on the owners’ or board of directors’ preferences and 
the markets in which they operate. An ethical business that goes bankrupt through its actions may 
result in less ethical businesses succeeding even more! 
Environmental issues 
Businesses must follow any legislation that is linked to the environment, but some businesses will 
choose to go beyond this with the environmental policies that they choose to follow. This decision will 
directly link to the firm’s view on ethics.  
Over recent years, there has been an increasing concern about the environment and as such, the 
number of UK laws on business and the environment have increased. Areas such as pollution, waste 
recycling and energy conservation have all increased business costs, as firms must meet these new 
standards. In many cases however, this increase in costs has been passed onto the consumer. 
Consumers will however, generally expect to pay a higher price for goods and services that have been 
produced in a sustainable, more environmentally friendly way, for example, they are happy to pay 
premium prices for organic products. 
Examples of how a business may attempt to reduce the impact on society of different environmental 
considerations are summarised in the table:  
  


===== PDF PAGE 87 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 86  
 
Environmental 
Consideration 
Possible effects on producers Possible effects on consumers 
Traffic 
congestion  
• Transport might be retimed to 
avoid rush hour 
• Distribution may be moved 
from road to rail 
• Businesses may relocate to 
benefit from better transport 
links 
• Service might be slower 
• Prices may go up because of the 
changes 
• Consumers may buy cheaper 
goods from less environmentally 
friendly sources  
•  
Recycling 
requirements 
• All businesses must try to 
reduce waste 
• Packaging should be minimised 
and be capable of recycling 
• Any waste that can be recycled 
must be separated. This service 
may vary depending on the area 
where the business is based 
• Recycling collections must be 
arranged and paid for 
 
• Consumers will pay more for goods 
and services  
• The society in which people live 
should be more pleasant, as there 
will less rubbish disposal sites in 
the future 
• Resources will last longer, so 
future costs will not increase as 
much 
Waste disposal • Businesses must have all waste 
collected and disposed of 
properly or they can fined  
• This can be combined with 
recycling arrangements 
• Some products, for example 
cooking oil, have strict disposal 
arrangements 
 
• Consumers will pay more for goods 
and services 
• The society in which consumers 
live should be more pleasant as 
there will less rubbish disposal 
sites in the future 
Pollution • Businesses will need an 
environmental permit if they 
produce significant air pollution 
• All businesses must not be a 
nuisance to their neighbours, 
for example smoke, dust, smells 
or noise 
• All businesses must have 
permission to discharge 
industrial waste into the water 
supply and are responsible for 
cleaning up any land 
contaminated  
• Pollution will be reduced 
• Business costs will increase, so 
prices to consumers may increase 
• There will be less need in the 
future for government to increase 
taxes to clean up  
• business pollution 
As can be seen from the table, there are both costs and benefits or trade-offs to producers and 
consumers of a business becoming more environmentally friendly. The success of environmental 
policies will often depend on international comparisons and how well policies are enforced. 


===== PDF PAGE 88 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 87  
Sustainability 
For an economy to be sustainable it must be able to maintain the current levels of production in the 
future. As many resources are non-renewable, this causes problems for both businesses and consumers. 
Consumers have unlimited wants, yet there are only limited resources in a society. New technology 
and improved communication can make sustainability more possible, however increases in population 
will make it more difficult to achieve.  
Growth in economies and their output has also caused increasing concerns over global warming. Factors 
such as industrial pollution and destruction of rainforests to increase agricultural production have 
caused global temperatures to rise. This change has resulted in increasing costs for businesses, in order 
to deal with the many effects of global warming, such as increased flooding and more unpredictable 
weather. 
Businesses and consumers both have a responsibility that any growth achieved is sustainable, but there 
will be costs. For example, renewable energy will be more expensive, recycling will increase costs and 
choosing more environmentally friendly production methods will mean higher prices. In the short term, 
producers will make less profit and consumers will be able to afford less goods and services, but these 
choices could mean there is a long term future for the world’s population. 
Pressure groups and the marketing mix 
A pressure group is an organisation with members who have a common interest. They will seek to 
change business or government policy through actions which can be peaceful, but involve protest. Their 
actions can also be more forceful and sometimes violent and illegal. 
A business’s marketing policy is often the target for consumer pressure groups. They can see marketing 
as a way to exploit the consumer in favour of excessive business profits. 
Some of the considerations that businesses might make in the light of actual or threatened pressure 
group activity are as follows: 
Product: - There may be objections to products produced by labour that has been exploited or that has 
involved product testing on animals. Products could be made more ethically, based on environmentally 
friendly processes. Supply chains might be changed to ensure there are no issues with suppliers. 
Price: - If too high a price is charged for basic or essential goods, there may be pressure group protests. 
This has happened with petrol and train fares. There have also been successful pressure group 
campaigns to reduce the price of some medicinal drugs. 
The “Treatment Action Campaign” has used mainly peaceful protests such as marches with placards to 
get publicity and reduce the price charged by companies for anti-Aids drugs. This has resulted in 
changes to government policies, so that this is achieved. 
Promotion: - Pressure groups may object to persuasive promotional campaigns. Bulk offer promotions 
by businesses are seen by some pressure groups as encouraging waste. There have also been protests 
against adverts for addictive products or payday loan companies. 
Greenpeace uses professional advertising campaigns against governments and businesses that are not 
in favour or protecting the environment or preventing climate change.  
Place: - With the growth of e-sales, there has been widespread closures of retail and financial outlets 
such as shops, banks and post offices. There have been various local and national pressure group 


===== PDF PAGE 89 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 88  
campaigns against these measures, claiming that they will hurt the most vulnerable members of our 
society. 
Local awareness and “use it or lose it” campaigns have been run in many villages to prevent the closure 
of their rural post office and shop. These have included village school competitions and poster 
distribution, as well as writing to MPs. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 90 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 89  
2.2 Making marketing decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Product The design mix 
The product life cycle 
Extension strategies 
Product differentiation 
Price Pricing strategies 
Influences on pricing strategies 
Promotion Promotional strategies 
Technology in promotion 
Place Methods of distribution 
Using the marketing mix in 
business decisions 
Relationships between marketing mix components 
Building competitive advantage through the marketing mix 
 
Product 
We live in a time of rapid technological development and constant change. Whilst some products may 
last for a long time, most do not. There is therefore a constant need to develop new goods and services 
to meet the changing wants and needs of customers.  
The design mix 
Good design is not just about having an attractive product. Good design also takes into account a 
product’s usefulness and its cost, as well as its look! 
The traditional product design mix emphasises three elements: 
• Function - The way the product works; does it do what it needs to do? Is the product reliable? 
• Aesthetics – does the product appeal to the customer in terms of how it looks and feels? This is 
often based on the subjective judgement of customers and is a popular way to differentiate a 
product from its competitors. 
• Cost - does the design allow the product to be made and sold profitably? How much value is 
added during the production process? The difference between the costs of making something 
and what a business can sell it for is the value added that allows a profit to be made. 


===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 90  
The mix of features required for a successful design of a product is often shown as an interrelated 
triangle: 
 
Function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aesthetics                          Cost 
Products can be located on the triangle to show the balance between the three features. A long lasting 
successful product is likely to be located in the centre of the triangle showing a balance in the product’s 
features.  
All businesses will focus on costs and operating efficiently. The two other parts of the design mix are 
now explained in further depth: 
Common features of products that successfully emphasise function in the design mix: 
• Demand is more stable and predictable  
• Longer product life cycles 
• Lower promotional costs 
• A reputation for quality based on reliability 
• Economic to manufacture through low average costs based on high production 
Common features of products that successfully emphasise aesthetics in the design mix 
• High added value 
• Demand fuelled by customer aspirations 
• Potentially shorter product life cycle 
• Attracts imitation, so there is need for design protection, for example patents, copyright 
• Need for greater promotional support  
Product life cycle 
The product life cycle is an important concept in marketing.  It describes the stages a product goes 
through from when it was first thought of until it is finally removed from the market. Not all products 
reach this final stage.  Some continue to grow and others rise and fall.   
The main stages of the product life cycle are: 
• Introduction – researching, developing and then launching the product 


===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 91  
Sales 
• Growth – when sales are increasing at their fastest rate 
• Maturity – sales are near their highest, but the rate of growth is slowing down because new 
competitors are entering the market or the market has become saturated with different versions 
of essentially the same product 
• Decline – final stage of the cycle, when sales begin to fall and ultimately the product will be 
removed from the market 
The product life cycle can be illustrated in a diagram, by looking at the sales during the time period of a 
particular product: 
 
Extension strategies extend the life of the product before it goes into decline.  Again, businesses use 
various marketing techniques to improve the sales of an existing product.   
Examples of these techniques include: 
• Advertising – try to gain a new audience or remind the current audience of the product 
• Price reduction – makes the product more attractive to customers 
• Adding value – add new features to the current product, for example video messaging on smart 
phones 
• Explore new or different markets – for example try selling the product in other countries 
• New packaging – brightening up old packaging or making small changes, such as putting crisps in 
foil packets  
 
However successful extension strategies might be, there will still come a time when the sales of a 
product will make it uneconomic for a business to continue to produce it. This could be because 
there is a replacement product or because the product is no longer wanted. Black and white TVs, 
videos, audio tapes and early versions of mobile phones will never gain any sales, however well they 
are advertised or how cheap they are! 
Product differentiation 
In a competitive market, firms will seek to make their product different from their rivals. This could be 
through different features or designs. If the product has something that no other product has, this is its 
unique selling point (USP). Having a USP will allow the business to charge a higher price and create 



===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 92  
customer loyalty. This, in turn, will enable the business to develop a brand for its product, where 
customers will return to the business for repeat purchases. They will also buy other products that are 
associated with the same brand which they perceive as being good value. 
If a business has a unique feature, then it can apply for legal protection for the feature or brand to 
ensure it cannot be copied. Dyson vacuum cleaners, Head and Shoulders shampoo and Rolls Royce cars 
can all claim to have unique selling points. If products are successful through their USP, other firms will 
ultimately try and imitate them, if they legally can – normally at a cheaper price. 
Price 
The pricing strategies that a business uses for its goods or services is one of the most important 
business decisions management will make. Setting a price that is too high or too low will, at best, limit 
business growth. At worst, it could cause serious problems for sales and cash-flow. 
This reinforces the fact that setting the selling price of a product is a very important decision. The bad 
news for entrepreneurs and all businesses is that pricing is really tough to get right.  There are so many 
factors to consider, and much uncertainty about whether a price change will have the desired effect the 
business was hoping for. 
High price or low price? 
The law of demand states that, for nearly all products, the higher the price the lower the demand.  In 
other words, sales will fall if prices are increased.  However, higher prices can also mean higher profits.  
Price is such an important factor for some businesses that it will form part of their overall business 
objectives and will therefore be a key component of their marketing mix.  
The effects on two different businesses of a change in price are given below:  
Example 1: 
A hotel chain specialising in business travel found that in the recent economic recession demand for its 
services had decreased and that often its hotels were only half full, a situation that was even worse at 
the weekends. The chain decided to decrease prices by an average of 25% and by the end of the year its 
average occupancy rate, or the number of times the rooms were booked, was over 90%. This meant 
that revenue and profits increased significantly for the chain. 
Example 2: 
A company supplying fruit and vegetables to a large supermarket chain found its profits getting lower, 
as costs increased and the price it charged its customers stayed the same. The business decided to 
increase its prices by 10%. As a result, the supermarket decided to decrease the amount it bought from 
the company and increase purchases from the many alternative suppliers it could use. As a result, the 
fruit and vegetable company’s sales fell by 50% and revenue dropped similarly, which had a negative 
knock on effect on its profit. 
As can be seen from the two examples, it could be a good idea to reduce prices a little if there is a 
significant increase in sales. Similarly, it is not a good idea to increase prices if there is going to be 
significant fall in sales, although the business might benefit if the fall in sales is very small, as revenue 
may increase, despite the number of units falling. 
A new business or an existing business launching a new product would have similar choices. It could 
enter the market with a high price, because the product is unique and will appeal to those customers 


===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 93  
who like to be first to have a new product. Many technology products, such as smart phones, use this 
pricing strategy. Alternatively, businesses could enter the market with a low price, with the aim of 
getting good sales and market share and building up brand loyalty, which would enable them to 
increase their selling prices at a later date. 
Factors that affect pricing decisions 
Some of the more important influences that a business needs to consider when setting the selling price 
are: 
• Objectives – what are the objectives of the firm? Is it for a “high price, high quality” business? Or 
has it a “low margin, high sales” strategy?  
• Competitors – this is really important. Competitor strength influences whether a business can 
set prices independently or whether it simply has to follow the normal market price. Price 
comparison sites often allow competitor price information to be easily accessed and due to this, 
businesses will be fairly similar in terms of price in some industries. Electrical good prices, such 
as televisions, are often fairly similar as so many are now brought online and therefore it is easy 
to gauge prices through price comparison sites. 
• Customers – the market segment which is targeted by the business will influence the selling 
price set. Factors such as age, income levels, location will impact on the decision. 
• Costs – a business cannot ignore the cost of production or buying a product when it comes to 
setting a selling price.  In the long-term, a business will fail if it sells for less than cost or if its 
gross profit margin is too low to cover the expenses or overheads of the business. 
• Product life cycle - pricing methods will change dependent on the stage the product is at in its 
product life cycle. For example, the price of a product in the decline stage of its product life-
cycle will need to be lower than when it was first launched. 
• The state of the market for the product – if there is a high demand for the product but a 
shortage of supply, then the business can put prices up. 
• The state of the economy – some products are more sensitive to changes in unemployment and 
workers’ wages than others.  Manufacturers of luxury products may need to drop prices to 
stimulate demand, especially when the economy is not doing well. 
• The bargaining power of customers in the target market – who are the buyers of the product? 
Do they have any bargaining power over the price set?  An individual consumer has little 
bargaining power over a supermarket, although they can take their custom elsewhere.  
However, an industrial or business customer that buys substantial quantities of a product from 
another firm may be able to negotiate lower or special prices. 
• Legislation in the market – some businesses operate in markets where prices are regulated by 
government legislation, for example the rail industry. 
Promotion 
The main aim of promotion is to ensure that customers are aware of the existence and positioning of 
products. Without this information customers will not be aware that the product exists. It is no good 
having a special offer on a product and not telling customers about it!  
Promotion is also used to persuade customers that one product is better than competing products and 
to remind customers about why they may want to buy it. 
Promotional activities can therefore have a variety of aims: 


===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 94  
• To inform current and potential customers about existing and new products 
• To explain the potential benefits of using the product 
• To persuade customers to buy the product 
• To compete with other businesses and show why a product is different or better than 
competitors 
• To increase growth through more sales to existing customers or sell in new markets 
• To present, change or improve an image of a business and to develop and sustain a brand 
• To remind customers about a product and reassure them that they have made the right choice 
Methods of promotion 
It is a common mistake to believe that promotion is all about advertising. It isn’t! There are a variety of 
approaches that a business can take to get their message across to customers, although advertising is 
certainly an important one. 
It is important to understand that a business will use more than one method of promotion. The 
combination of methods used by a business in its promotional strategy is referred to as the promotional 
mix. Three of the most important types of promotion are advertising, public relations/sponsorship and 
sales promotion or special offers. In recent years, social media has also become widely used and is very 
important in promoting a good or service. 
Advertising 
Advertising is any method of promotion that is paid for. Advertising presents or promotes the product 
to the target audience through different communication media such as TV, radio, cinema, 
billboards/posters, online and newspapers or magazines. 
The problem with advertising is that consumers are bombarded with advertising messages every day.  
How can a business get their message across effectively?  And how can a business measure the 
effectiveness of an advertising campaign? It is often said that businesses waste half their advertising 
spend – the problem is that they don’t know which half! 
When deciding which type of advertising to use a business needs to consider factors like: 
• Reach of the media – national or local; number of potential customers it could reach; how long 
before the message is seen 
• Nature of the product – the choice of media needs to reflect the image of the product; a 
recruitment advert would be placed in a trade magazine or newspaper, but a lipstick 
advertisement would be shown on television or in a magazine targeted at women 
• Position in the product life cycle – the launch stage will require different types of advertising 
from products undergoing extension strategies 
• Cost of advert and size of advertising budget – for example, local newspaper advertising is 
cheaper than radio, which in turn is cheaper than television. But the business will also want to 
consider cost per head, i.e. the cost of reaching each potential customer, if aiming to reach a 
larger audience 
• Online or offline – there has been substantial growth in businesses that advertise online, as they 
swap some, or sometimes all, of their advertising budgets to reach internet users 
Advertising can also be split into two main types: 
• Persuasive advertising - this tries to entice the customer to buy the product by informing them 
of the product benefit 


===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 95  
• Informative advertising - this gives the customer information and is largely carried out by the 
government, for example health campaigns, new welfare benefits 
The main advantages and disadvantages of advertising as a method of promotion are: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Wide coverage – can reach mass audiences 
 Control of message being promoted 
 Segmentation possible through choice of 
media used, for example children’s 
television 
 Repetition means that the message can be 
communicated effectively 
 Can be used to build brand loyalty  
 Often expensive; TV is very expensive 
 Impersonal and not very accurate in aiming 
at customers, so high wastage 
 One way communication and no guarantee 
the message is being received 
 Not all potential customers will use the 
chosen media: TV, internet, radio, 
newspapers 
 Easy to get lost in the amount of competing 
adverts, for example posters, internet 
 Limited ability to close a sale 
Branding a product 
A brand is a product with unique character, for instance in design or image.  It is consistent and well 
recognised. Branding is often used as a vital part of the promotional process. 
The advantages of having a strong brand are that it: 
 Inspires customer loyalty, leading to repeat sales and word-of mouth recommendation. 
 The brand owner can usually charge higher prices, especially if the brand is the market leader. 
 Retailers or service sellers want to stock top selling brands.  With limited shelf space, it is more 
likely the top brands will be on the shelves in leading stores rather than less well-known brands. 
Some retailers use “own-label” brands, where they use their name in the product’s name, for example 
“Tesco Finest” or “Sainsbury Taste the Difference”, rather than the manufacturers name, such as Heinz. 
Supermarket own brands tend to be cheaper and will give the retailer more profit, than selling the 
manufacturers brands. 
Some brands are so strong they have become global brands.  This means that the product is sold in 
many countries and the contents are very similar.  Examples of global brands include Microsoft, Coca 
Cola, Disney, Mercedes and Hewlett Packard.   
The strength of a brand can be exploited by a business to develop new products.  This is known as brand 
extension i.e. developing a new product with some of the brand’s original characteristics included in it.  
Examples include Dove soap and Dove shampoo, which both contain a moisturising factor, Mars bar and 
Mars ice cream, which clearly have many close similarities. 
Brand stretching is where the brand is used for a diverse range of products, not necessarily connected, 
for example Virgin trains and Virgin media, Marks and Spencer clothes and food. Brand stretching will 
help to drive sales for the business, particularly if the brand is well respected and trusted. 
The logo on a product is an important part of the product.  A logo is a symbol or picture that represents 
the business.  It is important because it is easy to recognise, establishes brand loyalty and can create a 
favourable image. 


===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 96  
Sponsorship 
Sponsorship is a specialist type of public relations and is becoming increasingly popular, particularly 
with larger businesses. A business will donate money to an event, team or individual, in return for which 
they will display the business name or logo. This will build brand awareness. A secondary objective 
might be to emphasise social or ethical policies, but most sponsorship really does have a targeted 
commercial objective.  
Major sporting events, sports celebrities and sporting teams all benefit from substantial business 
sponsorship.  At a local level, it is common for small businesses to sponsor local teams or to donate 
prizes to local events. 
Sales promotion 
Sales promotion is the process of persuading a potential customer to buy the product. It takes place 
near to where the purchasing decision will take place, for example in a shop, and therefore is often 
referred to as taking place at point of sale (pos).  Sales promotion is designed to be used as a short-
term tactic to boost sales. It is not really designed to build long-term customer loyalty.  
There are many methods of sales promotion, including: 
 Product trials - a free or reduced price product may be given as a sample with the hope that 
consumers will then continue to buy the product in the future. Magazine collections are good 
examples and more recently TV film providers, such as Netflix and Amazon Prime. 
 Money off coupons – customers receive coupons, for example coupons cut out of newspapers or 
a products packaging, that enables them to buy the product at a reduced price 
 Additional products – for example buy one get one free (BOGOF); often seen as encouraging 
waste, but a business can sell stock quickly 
 Competitions – buying the product will allow the customer to take part in a chance to win a 
prize; can encourage repeat purchases as well as one off sales 
 Special offers/discount vouchers or temporary price reductions– these encourage customers to 
try new products or relaunched products; these offers can then be removed once customers 
become loyal 
 Free gifts/samples – a free product when a customer buys another product; samples are 
sometimes given to try a product for free, in the hope that customers will then buy the product 
at a later date 
 Displays - near check outs or on shelves in stores can be used to encourage sale of a particular 
product; this is why chocolate confectionary products are often displayed near the till in many 
food retailers 
 Loyalty cards – these are now offered by many retailers and petrol stations. Customers are able 
to earn points for buying certain goods or shopping that can later be exchanged for money, 
goods or other offers. They also provide information to the business about the shopping habits 
of customers – where they shop, when and what they buy.  This is very valuable marketing 
research and can be used in the planning process for new and existing products 
  


===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 97  
The main advantages and disadvantages of sales promotion are: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Effective at achieving a quick boost to sales 
and can be used to sell stock that is not 
selling fast enough 
 Encourages customers to try a product or 
switch brands 
 Sales effect may only be short-term 
 Customers may come to expect or 
anticipate further promotions  
 Some customers only buy special offers 
 May damage brand image 
When undertaking a sales promotion, there are several factors that a business must take into account in 
judging its effectiveness: 
• What does the promotion cost – will the resulting sales boost justify the investment? 
• Is the sales promotion consistent with the brand image?  A promotion that heavily discounts a 
product with a premium price might create some long-term damage to a brand 
• Will the sales promotion attract customers who will continue to buy the product once the 
promotion ends or will it simply attract those customers who are always on the look-out for a 
bargain? 
Using technology in promotion 
The increased use of the internet has allowed cheaper and far more accurate promotional strategies. 
Advertising can be linked to the profile of customers using particular websites and allows businesses to 
capture customer and potential customer details and then communicate with them through special 
offers, e-newsletters, blogs and many other promotions and reminders. 
Social media is both a location for advertising and also a method of advertising. Viral advertising 
through sharing sites, such as used in Facebook and YouTube, can create real excitement about a 
product or new product and as a result, can create massive brand awareness very quickly. This often 
costs very little, but it is clearly very hard for a business to guarantee success.  
Smart phones also provide a new opportunity for promotion and the development of “Apps” by 
businesses allows communication to be easily made with a customer – and for the customer to interact 
with the business through e-commerce or m-commerce. 
Factors influencing the choice of promotion 
 
There are many factors that will influence which mix of promotional methods a business will choose to 
use: 
 
• Budget: all forms of promotion can be very expensive. TV advertising costs run into millions of 
pounds and even a box advert in a local newspaper can be over £1,000. Some businesses will 
spend up to 10% of their total costs on advertising. Often it is difficult to directly link promotion 
costs with sales increases, but without promotion there would be no customers! 
• Type of product: some products are produced for other businesses to buy rather than the public 
in general. A tractor company would be better advised to have a stall at an agricultural show or 
an advert in a farmer’s magazine, rather than a TV advertising campaign.  
• Type of customer: choice of promotional strategy will be different depending who the target 
customers are. For example the Waitrose and Marks and Spencer’s food stores will have very 
different target customers to Lidl and Aldi and will use different promotional strategies. 


===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 98  
• Competition: the promotional strategy of a competitor will influence a business’s own strategy. 
Advertising and sales promotion will often imitate the strategy of a competitor and competitors 
may retaliate to any promotional strategy that a business undertakes.   
• Product life cycle: if the product is new or relates to a new business then the aim of promotion 
will be to make customers aware that it exists. In this case, advertising or PR will be most 
appropriate. If the customers are aware of the product, but need persuading to buy it then sales 
promotion is very helpful.  
• Expertise: although it will not necessarily change their strategy, larger businesses are likely to 
have their own marketing and promotional departments. They will be able to design and 
implement their own initiatives.  In other cases and for smaller firms, they may have to use 
marketing or PR agencies who will be able to provide specialist help and advice. 
 
Place 
Place, or its more common name “distribution”, is about how a business gets its products to the 
customers.   
It is one thing having a great product, sold at an attractive price.   But what if: 
• Customers are not near a retailer that is selling the product? 
• A competing product is stocked by a much wider range of outlets? 
• A competitor is winning because it has a team of trained distributors or sales agents who are out 
there meeting customers and closing the sale?  
Distribution matters for a business of any size – it is a crucial part of the marketing mix. 
The objective of distribution is clear.  It is: 
“To make products available in the right place at the right time in the right quantities” 
Distribution is achieved by using one or more distribution channels, including: 
• Retailers 
• Wholesalers 
• Distributors / sales agents 
• Direct, for example via e-commerce/e-tailers or telesales 
The role of a distribution channel 
A distribution channel can be defined as: 
"all the organisations through which a product must pass between its point of production and 
consumption" 
Looking at that definition, it can be seen that a product might pass through several stages before it 
finally reaches the consumer.  The organisations involved in each stage of distribution are commonly 
referred to as “intermediaries”. 
Why does a business give the job of selling its products to intermediaries? After all, using an 
intermediary means giving up some control over how products are sold and who they are sold to. An 
intermediary will also want to make a profit by getting involved. 


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 99  
The answer lies in efficiency of distribution costs. Intermediaries are specialists in selling. They have the 
contacts, experience and scale of operation, which means that greater sales can be achieved than if the 
producing business tried to run a sales operation itself. 
The main function of a distribution channel is to provide a link between production and the consumer 
who will ultimately use the product.  
How many stages in the distribution channel? 
A distribution channel can have several stages depending on how many organisations are involved in it: 
 
Looking at the diagram: 
Channel 1 contains two stages between producer and consumer - a wholesaler and a retailer. A 
wholesaler typically buys and stores large quantities of several producers’ goods and then breaks into 
bulk deliveries to supply retailers with smaller quantities. For small retailers with limited order 
quantities, for example the local corner shop, the use of wholesalers makes economic sense.  
Channel 2 contains one intermediary a retailer. The consumer electrical goods market in the UK is 
typical of this arrangement whereby producers such as Sony, Panasonic, Canon etc. sell their goods 
directly to large retailers such as Currys, Tesco and Amazon, which then sell onto the final consumers. 
Channel 3 is called a "direct-marketing" or “direct-sale” channel, since it has no intermediary levels. In 
this case the manufacturer sells directly to customers. This is increasingly used as e-commerce becomes 
more popular. Many holiday companies market direct to consumers, bypassing the traditional retail 
intermediary - the travel agent.  
We will now consider these intermediaries in more detail: 
Retailers 
Retailers are the most popular distribution channel for consumer goods, as they operate outlets that 
trade directly with household customers. Retailers can be classified in several ways: 
• Type of goods being sold (e.g. clothes, grocery, furniture) 
• Type of service (e.g. self-service, counter-service) 
• Size (e.g. corner shop; superstore) 
• Ownership (e.g. privately-owned independent; public-quoted retail group) 
• Location (e.g. rural, city-centre, out-of-town) 
• Brand (e.g. nationwide retail brands; local one-shop name) 



===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 100  
Retailers enable producers to reach a wider audience, particularly if broad coverage by the major retail 
chains can be obtained. The big disadvantage to using a retailer is the loss of profit margin.  A high 
street retailer will typically look to take at least 40-50% of the final consumer price, depending on the 
nature of the product and the speed of stock turnover. 
Wholesalers 
Wholesalers stock a range of products from several producers. The role of the wholesaler is to sell onto 
retailers. Wholesalers usually specialise in particular products, for example food products.  
 The advantage of wholesalers is they “break the bulk” that is they will receive direct loads from 
producers and split this into smaller units for retailers. This means that retailers can hold less 
stock. 
 However, the costs are increased due to the wholesaler’s “middle-man” profits. 
Overall there are several potential advantages of using an intermediary: 
 More efficient distribution logistics 
 Costs, even taking into account the intermediaries’ profit or commission, may be lower 
 Consumers may expect choice i.e. the products and brands of many producers at the point of 
sale 
 Producers may not have sufficient resources or expertise to sell direct 
Selling direct (including e-tailers) 
A key decision a business has to make about distribution is whether to sell “direct”. 
Direct marketing means selling products by dealing directly with consumers rather than through 
intermediaries.  
Traditional methods include mail order, direct-mail selling, cold calling, telephone selling (telesales), 
and door-to-door calling. More recently telemarketing, direct radio selling, magazine and TV advertising, 
and on-line computer shopping i.e. e-commerce have been developed. This has given rise to the 
development of e-tailers who make sales through e-commerce and then distribute their product direct 
to the consumers. 
The main advantages of selling direct are that: 
 there is no need to share profit margins  
 the producer has complete control over the sales process 
 products are not sold alongside those of competitors.  
There may also be specific market factors that encourage direct selling: 
• There may be a need for an expert sales force, to demonstrate products, provide detailed pre -
sale information and after-sales service 
• Retailers, distributors, dealers and other intermediaries may be unwilling to sell the product 
• Existing distribution channels may be owned by, or linked to, competing producers, making it 
harder to obtain distribution by any other means than direct 
 However, there are significant costs associated with selling direct which may be higher than the 
costs associated with using an intermediary to generate the same level of sales. A small business 


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 101  
that produces boxes of cauliflowers will find it cheaper and more time efficient to use a retailer 
to sell the cauliflowers rather than driving round every possible customer in a van. 
What is the best distribution channel for a product? 
What factors should be taken into account in choosing the best distribution channel? Here is a 
summary: 
• Nature of the product: is it technical/complex? Complex products are often sold by specialist 
distributors or agents. Cars will often use this type of approach. 
• Customised: a direct distribution approach often works best for a product that the end 
consumer wants produced to a distinct specification. A wedding cake, made to measure clothing 
– or even double glazing are all examples! 
• Image of the product – if intermediaries are to be used, then it is essential that those chosen are 
suitable and relevant for the product. Top brands in clothes and cosmetics will want their 
products sold through John Lewis not through Primark! 
• The market, for example is it geographically spread? Does it involve selling overseas? If selling 
products overseas, then a car manufacturer business might use an overseas agent to distribute 
and sell their cars. 
• The extent and nature of the competition – which distribution channels and intermediaries do 
competitors use? Apple might not wish to sell their products through a shop that also sells 
Samsung products. 
• The business size – small businesses may have to use wholesalers as they cannot store a large 
amount of stock. They might also use intermediaries, such as agents, if they are too small to 
afford an in-house sales and distribution force. 
• Its business objectives – are they linked to revenue or profit maximisation? 
• How much control does it want over distribution?  The longer the channel, the less control is 
available. Some manufacturers will want to control how a product is displayed, the price charged 
and the promotional method used. 
Using the marketing mix to make business decisions 
 
The use and importance of the ingredients of the marketing mix will very much depend on the good or 
service being produced. A high quality perfume will be more focused on promotion and product than 
price. This would compare with milk, where the product is much more standard and there is limited 
need for promotion. Therefore, price would be more critical in this instance. 
 
Some of the more important factors affecting the use of the marketing mix are as follow: 
 
• Competition – if there is little or no competition then a business may not attach much priority to 
its marketing at all. Although neglecting the product and the development of new products 
would not be recommended. The business would be more likely charge a higher price compared 
to being in a very competitive market, where more is likely to be spent on branding and 
promotion. 
• Market segment – Some market segments will be less receptive to some aspects of the 
marketing mix. E-tailing may not be as successful with retired customers as it might be with 
teenagers. Retired customers might value a more convenient distribution channel. 
• Nature of the product – sacks of potatoes will not be ideal products for e-tailing. However, the 
quality and price of the product will be critical for customer satisfaction and repeat sales in this 


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 102  
instance. Paperless products, such as airline and concert tickets, would however be appropriate, 
as there is no real need for a physical product to be distributed. 
• Finance – even for established businesses promotion in general, and advertising in particular, 
can be very expensive. This might limit the use of the marketing mix to areas which can be 
demonstrated as cost effective. 
Competitive advantage 
Based on the above factors the business will balance the marketing mix components to allow it to 
establish an advantage over its competitors. This might mean a lower price, a better product or a good 
special offer. Advertising products when rivals are not may result in more potential customers being 
made aware of a firm’s products, who then may be tempted to purchase them too! 
 
Competitive advantage in action: 
 
• Business finds out what their competitive advantage is – this could be unique product or feature – 
only Ford Cars have heated front windscreens. It could also be a cheaper price because they have 
access to cheap raw materials, or in the case of Ford they have legal protection on the heated 
windscreen. 
• Decision made – a business may choose to continue to use its current competitive advantage or may 
look to change it. A successful marketing campaign such the Go Compare singing adverts were used 
successfully and then dropped as the company wanted a new type of promotion to be used. This 
was less successful in making its name memorable compared to other price comparison sites, so the 
singer returned …in a taxi! 
 
There will always be constant change in the environment in which the business operates. If a business is 
going to continue to be successful and remain competitive over rivals, its marketing mix must be flexible 
to effectively adapt to these changes and must be fully integrated to ensure that each part of it 
complements the others. 
 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 103  
2.3 Making Operational Decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business operations Purpose of operations 
Production processes (job, batch, flow) 
Productivity 
Technology and its impact 
Working with suppliers Stock management 
Procurement  
Suppliers and logistics 
Managing quality Quality control and quality assurance 
Controlling costs through quality 
The sales process The selling process 
Customer service and its importance 
 
Business operations 
The purpose of business operations is to turn raw materials into goods and services. There are a variety 
of methods that can be used including job, batch and flow production. There are many surrounding 
issues that are involved in making the business operation as efficient as possible. These include ensuring 
that supplies are reliable, quality is good and that the customer service involved in the operation is also 
of a high standard. 
Production processes: Job production 
Job production is typically used by small businesses. It involves making one-off or a small number of 
items. These are often made to the customer’s requirements, ranging from the simple, for example a 
haircut, to the moderately difficult, for example a wedding cake and finally to something long and 
complex, for example building a new bridge.   
Job production often allows a business to make its good or service different to competitors, including 
larger businesses, and is particularly common in the service sector. A made to measure clothes shop can 
be successful, even though there are large multi-national clothes retailers that exist and cater for the 
mass market. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of using job production include: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 104  
 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Products are usually of high quality   Costs of producing one unit or job are 
higher than producing a large number of 
the same good or service 
 Producer meets individual customer 
requirements  
 Labour intensive, as less suited to the use 
of machinery 
 Greater job satisfaction for employees, as 
they are involved in all stages of production  
 Requires skilled employees, who will 
demand higher levels of pay and perhaps 
require ongoing training  
Production processes: Batch production 
Batch production occurs when many similar items are produced together. Each batch of the product 
goes through one stage of the production process before moving onto the next stage together as a 
group.  The products will be similar but have some variation, for example different style, different size 
or different colour. Good examples include: 
• Furniture manufacture 
• Baking / meal preparation 
• Clothing production 
The benefits and drawbacks of batch production include: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Making in batches reduces unit costs, as 
more than one unit is produced at a time, 
meaning fixed costs are spread across 
more units  
 Time lost switching between batches, as 
machinery may need to be reset resulting 
in a reduction in efficiency 
 Can still address specific customer needs 
including size, weight, style. For example 
car manufacturers can vary the colour, 
engine size and extra features even within 
the production of a batch of one model of 
car being produced 
 Need to keep stocks of raw materials, 
which will impact on cash flow, as money is 
tied up in stock and in work in progress i.e. 
products that are moving through the 
production process but are not yet finished 
and therefore cannot be sold 
 Use of specialist machinery and skills can 
increase output and productivity, making 
the process more efficient than job 
production  
 Potentially de-motivating for staff as tasks 
are more repetitive compared to job 
production; this can lower productivity 
Production processes: Flow production 
As a business grows the scale of its operations, it often needs to change its method of production to 
allow it to produce more and increase its production capacity. 
A small business might use job production to provide a personalised or distinctive product.  However, if 
the product is intended for much larger, mass markets, then other methods of production may be 


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 105  
required in order for the product to be produced efficiently.  A key production method in these 
circumstances is flow production. 
Flow production involves a continuous movement of items through the production process.  Flow 
production, also known as mass production, uses production lines to manufacture products. For 
example, in a car manufacturing plant, doors, engines, bonnets and wheels are added to a chassis as it 
moves along the assembly line.  This type of production is appropriate when firms are looking to 
produce a high volume of similar items.  Some of the big manufacturing brand names, that have 
consistently high demand, are most suited to this type of production, for example Heinz baked beans. 
Flow production is capital intensive.  This means it uses a high proportion of machinery in relation to 
workers. 
The benefits and drawbacks of flow production include: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Ideal for large-scale production of mass-
market products  
 Expensive to purchase machinery and to 
set up  
 Less use of labour; a business can more 
easily operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week, reducing the average cost per unit, 
as long as demand for the products in 
question is there 
 Production can be inflexible  
 Workers used can specialise in one job or 
one part of the production process, which 
makes them more efficient 
 Jobs can be repetitive and boring, lowering 
the motivation of workers  
 Can still create personalised products using 
computer-programmed machinery 
 Can involve considerable risk to a business; 
it takes a lot of planning time to organise 
the production process 
Improving productivity 
All businesses want their production operation to be as efficient as possible. In order to do this, they will 
aim to maximise their productivity. 
Productivity can be defined as the amount produced (output) for a given number of employees (input). 
Clearly businesses want this to be as high as possible! 
In order to improve productivity, businesses will invest in their employees through better recruitment, 
training and motivation. They may also invest in better equipment. Although such investments will have 
a short term cost, they will have the potential to save the business money in the long run. 
It should be noted that improving productivity is NOT the same as increasing production. Productivity is 
about efficiency and lowering the average cost of producing goods and services. Production is about 
the total quantity produced. 
There are many benefits of improving productivity. It allows the business to make more profits, as the 
costs of producing a certain amount of goods will be reduced. This is because a firm’s fixed costs are 
spread across more units. This would therefore enable a business to have more flexibility with its pricing 
decisions and give it the opportunity to charge lower prices, because the average cost of making one 
unit is lowered. This means the business will be more competitive. Alternatively, the business could 


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 106  
keep the selling price the same, but with an increase in productivity the business would be able to enjoy 
an increased profit margin on each item sold.  
Production technology 
Computer based technology can have many uses in the production process. It can be used in design or 
in the manufacturing process where it is often linked to the use of robots.  
 
Some of its benefits are: 
 
 It will increase the speed of production. 
 It can reduce the average unit cost significantly compared to using labour. 
 It allows the business to be flexible, as a computer can now be programmed to add in variations 
to meet the customer’s requirements; this is often used in car production. This is a major 
development, as traditionally in the past, machines were very difficult to change and adapt to 
customer requirements.  
 It can also increase the quality of goods, as human variation is removed. As a result, the business 
should always be able to provide a consistent level of quality to its customers. 
 Machines also do not need regular breaks like workers do!  
 
There are however some drawbacks: 
 
 The initial costs are very expensive. 
 Machines can breakdown, resulting in a loss of production time. 
 Machines will need some “downtime” or time for servicing to prevent breakdowns in the future; 
during this time, production will be limited. 
 There may be a waste of capacity if the machines output is not fully needed and therefore it is 
idle for a period of time. 
 
Overall, a business will need to balance the costs of the technology, with the savings and benefits it will 
provide, when making any decisions about investing in technology. 
Working with suppliers 
The relationship a business has with its suppliers is absolutely critical in terms of its success. A supplier is 
another business that supplies goods or services to a business to enable it to function and produce its 
products. 
If a firm’s suppliers produces poor quality raw materials and is unreliable with their deliveries, this will 
affect the performance and reputation of the business. Managing stock in terms of ensuring the right 
quantity is always available at the right time, at the right quality is therefore a very important role 
within any business.  
Stock control 
The overall objective of stock control is to make sure that a business does not run out of stock, but also 
to order stock in a way that the costs of holding stock is minimised. In order to help the stock control 
process, businesses will often use bar gate stock control charts, although in today’s business world, 
these are often computerised and linked to suppliers, so the process of stock control is automatic. 
An example of a traditional bar gate stock control chart is shown below: 


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 107  
 
This bar gate stock graph shows how stock levels decrease over time as stock is used up, until a new 
order arrives when the stock level increases again. 
 
Looking at the example, in week zero the business was holding 800 units of stock. However,  by week 2 
it had used 600 units, as the volume of stock held in week two reached the minimum level the business 
overall wishes to hold of 200 units. This therefore shows that the business was using up stock at a 
steady rate of 300 units per week. In week 2, delivery of 600 units arrives which brought the stock level 
back up to the maximum stock level that the business wants to hold of 800 units. The maximum level of 
800 units may be set at this limit due to a lack of space or alternatively the stock may have a short shelf 
life and therefore there may be a danger that the stock may become out of date if more was held and 
not used. 
 
The new order which arrived in week 2, as already discussed, was triggered at the reorder level of 400 
units. As a new order and delivery of that order takes just under a week to arrive, a new order must be 
placed at 400 units, otherwise the business would end up using some of its buffer stock that it is holding 
“just in case” there is a problem with some stock in the delivery i.e. poor quality or a delivery is late. 
Alternatively, if the business experienced a rush of orders then the buffer stock is there for the business 
to use to ensure that all orders are met successfully and customer service is kept high, due to orders 
being produced and delivered by the business on time! 
The key parts of the bar gate stock graph are therefore: 
Maximum level 
This shows the maximum level of stock a business can or wants to hold.  
• Example from graph: 800 units. 
Re-order level 



===== PDF PAGE 109 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 108  
This is a trigger point; when stock falls to this level, the next supplier order should be placed.  
• Example from graph: 400 units 
Lead time 
This is the time it takes between placing the order and receiving the stock 
• Example from graph: just under a week 
Minimum stock level or Buffer Sock 
This amount of stock is held “just in case” of unexpected orders; this helps to ensure that such orders 
can be met and other orders can be met in case of any delays in deliveries from suppliers. It is the 
minimum amount of stock the business would want to hold; the firm would not want its stock levels to 
fall below this level, as it may run out and therefore may not be able to satisfy customer orders. 
• Example from graph: 200 units. 
 
Factors affecting when and how much stock to reorder 
There are many factors that a business would need to consider when deciding how much stock to order 
or reorder, to ensure the business can run as efficiently as possible without running out of stock. These 
are: 
Lead-time from the supplier 
• How long it takes for the supplier to deliver the order 
• Longer lead times may require a higher re-order level, for example supplies that are being 
shipped from the Far East may take as long as 8 weeks to arrive into the UK 
Implications of running out of stock altogether i.e. the risk of stock-outs 
• If stock-outs are very damaging to the firm’s reputation and will impact heavily on future 
orders, then businesses should set a higher re-order level and quantity, plus increase the 
amount of buffer stock it holds 
Demand for the product 
• Higher or growing demand normally means higher re-order levels, to ensure that demand 
and orders can be fully met 
Managing stock 
All businesses will set itself a target stock level of finished goods that it should achieve. This is calculated 
to satisfy the demand expected by the marketing department plans and based on what the production 
department thinks it can produce.  If the stock level falls below this level, then the firm’s productivity 
level has fallen since the output per worker has not met the planned requirements.  
Modern manufacturing firms use sophisticated production software to plan production for each period 
of time, which includes ordering the correct stock. The planned output levels will in turn determine how 
many raw materials are kept in stock, to ensure orders can always be met. Stock management also 


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 109  
apply to services, for example the level of staffing that is available to meet expected or unexpected 
demand in a supermarket at the checkout. 
Just in time (JIT) stock control 
Just in time is a method of stock control that applies to raw materials, work in progress and finished 
products. If a business applies this technique then it will minimise the amount of all stock held. 
The successful operation of just in time requires a carefully planned scheduling and flow of resources 
through the production process. Supplies are delivered right to the production line only when they are 
needed. For example, a car manufacturing plant might receive exactly the right number and type of 
tyres for one day’s production and the supplier would be expected to deliver them to the correct 
loading bay on the production line within a very narrow time slot. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of JIT can be summarised as follows: 
Advantages of JIT Disadvantages of JIT 
 Lower stock holding means a reduction in 
storage space, which saves rent and 
insurance costs  
 There is little room for mistakes, as 
minimal stock is kept for re-working faulty 
products 
 As stock is only obtained when it is needed, 
less money is tied up in stock and is 
therefore available for other purposes 
 Production is very reliant on suppliers and 
if stock is not delivered on time, the whole 
production schedule can be delayed  
 There is less likelihood of stock perishing, 
becoming obsolete or out of date  
 There are no spare finished products or 
spare stock available to meet unexpected 
orders, because all products are made to 
meet actual orders. This can lead to lower 
levels of customer service 
 Avoids the build-up of unsold finished 
products that can occur with sudden 
changes in demand  
 No economies of scale possible from bulk 
purchasing and single deliveries 
Successful operation of JIT requires a good relationship with suppliers. To ensure deliveries can be made 
relatively easily and on time, suppliers are normally located relatively close to their customers i.e. the 
business that operates JIT. Overall, if demand is consistent or easy to predict, then JIT is likely to be 
successful.  
Procurement  
Procurement is the process by which suppliers are chosen. This will include deciding what is needed and 
how it is ordered, as well as the process of receiving and managing the goods arrival. Having the right 
suppliers is essential if the business is to succeed. A failure in procurement can lead to a failure of the 
business. 
Procurement is not just the process of choosing a supplier. It is the whole process of managing the 
ordering and receipt of the goods or services ordered. The details of this process are considered below: 
Relationship with suppliers 
There are many factors that will influence the choice of supplier(s) in a business. When making this 
important choice, business managers will need to think about many different issues and prioritise the 


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 110  
most important to their specific business needs. A brief explanation of the possible factors that a 
business may consider when making supplier decisions is provided in the table: 
Factor Explanation 
Cost If a supplier’s prices are cheap, then the business can decrease its selling price and 
potentially make more sales. It could also just make more profit, as the difference 
between its unit cost and the selling price will increase. It is possible that by going for 
the cheaper suppliers however, that quality will suffer and customer satisfaction will 
also decrease, leading to a loss of long term sales. 
Alternatively, if the costs are high, possibly because of high quality, then profit will be 
less. In some cases, the business may be able to increase its selling prices and “pass on” 
the higher costs to its customers. 
Quality High quality suppliers will mean that customer satisfaction will be high, so it is more 
likely they will make repeat purchases and remain loyal. As already discussed, it may 
mean that costs are likely to be more and profit less. 
Delivery  Cost of transporting the supplies may be important in choosing a local supplier. It is no 
good buying cheaper supplies if the delivery costs are very expensive. 
Speed of delivery will be important in some industries. If the goods are likely to perish 
or deteriorate over time, such as fresh fruit and vegetables or flowers, then the speed 
of delivery is critical. 
Reliable delivery is essential if a business has a short turn-around time for delivering its 
product to its customers or if it uses JIT. The business will want a supplier that can 
deliver, so it does not run out of stock.  
Availability For a supplier to be of use it must be able to supply the business with goods of the 
quality required at the time that they are needed. In some cases, a supplier may be 
able to source suppliers from elsewhere if needed at short notice, dependent if they 
have spare capacity i.e. room in their production schedule to fit another order in. In 
this case however, quality checks would need to be performed, to ensure quality 
standards are maintained. 
Trust 
 
Some suppliers will have too many orders at certain times than it is able to cope with. 
For a long term supply relationship to work, then a regular, loyal business will expect to 
have priority over occasional customers. This will mean that supplies will always be 
available when required. 
A business may also use the following additional criteria to base its supplier choice on: 
• Industry: in some industries it is essential that prices are set as low as possible, as profits are 
small and quality is less of a priority. This applies in industries which are very competitive. 
• Cash flow/finance: some businesses may not have the cash flow to pay suppliers which might 
have good quality and fairly priced goods, but which require immediate cash payment for them. 
Some suppliers offer credit to the purchasing business which might be a very important factor, 
as it allows a business to buy the stock, but pay for it at a later date, ideally after the business 
has had the opportunity to sell it. 
• Customer expectations: some customers may be less worried about price compared to quality. 
This will mean that suppliers chosen must maintain quality, even if the price is increased. An 
expensive restaurant cannot choose low quality low cost ingredients, as otherwise its reputation 
would suffer and it would lose customers. 


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 111  
Logistics 
Logistics is part of the procurement process. Logistics is the part of the supply chain that plans, 
implements and controls the distribution and storage of goods and services from the supplier until it 
arrives at the customer. Logistics is often seen as the transportation of raw materials and finished 
goods, but as with procurement it is a process not just a single activity. 
Logistics starts with suppliers and ends with the customer and can be illustrated as a flow of goods and 
information in one direction with money flowing in reverse. An example of a chain of logistics is 
illustrated below: 
  
Managing the logistics process is vital for a business to be successful. There are many consequences of 
failure in this distribution process and the key factors are summarised in the table: 
Factor Explanation 
Reputation If the supply chain breaks or slows, this can mean that products are delayed 
reaching the retailer, which may then be out of stock of some items. This will affect 
sales now and also potentially in the long term, particularly if this becomes a 
persistent problem and the business gains a reputation for being unreliable. 
In manufacturing, on time delivery can be even more critical, as a missing part 
might hold up the whole production process.  
Suppliers who cannot deliver effective logistics will gain a poor reputation and are 
unlikely to get repeat contracts. 
Cost There are many options in the logistics process. Which method or methods of 
transport should be used? Should the raw materials be bought directly from the 
producer – or through an intermediary, such as a retailer? Clearly expected timings 
must be met, but if the cost of the logistics is too high then competitors will have 
lower costs and therefore potentially cheaper prices. 
Customer 
satisfaction 
If the products arrive with the customer at the time and in the condition expected, 
given the price paid, then the customer will be happy. If the customer is happy, 
then he/she may be prepared to tell others and order again. With the use of digital 
technology today, customers increasingly receive communication updating them 
on the status of any order, which helps to manage their expectations in terms of 
delivery status and exact timings. 



===== PDF PAGE 113 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 112  
Managing quality 
If a business is to be successful it must have satisfied customers. In order for customers to be satisfied, 
they must have received a good or service that matches their expectations of quality, taking into 
account the price they have paid.  
A good definition of quality is: 
“Quality is about meeting the needs and expectations of customers” 
Customers want quality that is appropriate to the price that they are prepared to pay and the level of 
competition in the market.  
Key aspects of quality for the customer include: 
• Good design – looks and style 
• Good functionality – it does the job well 
• Reliable – acceptable level of breakdowns or failure 
• Consistency 
• Durable – lasts as long as it should 
• Good after sales service 
• Value for money 
“Value for money” is especially important, because in most markets there is room for products of 
different overall levels of quality and the customer must be satisfied that the price fairly reflects the 
quality.  
Some goods and services are marketed as “basic”, having none of the extra features and benefits of 
more expensive alternatives. Good examples would be budget airlines and low cost supermarkets. Even 
though they may be “low quality” in terms of style or features, these products can still give good value 
for money given their expected level of quality. 
For the firm, good design is also fundamental, so that the product can be produced efficiently, reliably 
and at the lowest possible cost. 
However, it is important to remember that: 
• Quality is often a matter of personal opinion and what is an acceptable level of quality will vary 
from one individual to another 
• Not all aspects of quality can be measured. A firm’s name or reputation can be a very important 
indicator of quality, even though it is hard to measure. 
• Quality standards are always changing as improved technology, better materials, different 
manufacturing techniques and new competitors come to light 
Consequences of poor quality can be very damaging for a business. There will however, be costs to the 
businesses in providing and ensuring quality that is consistently in line with customer expectations.  
Approaches to managing quality 
Achieving high quality does not happen by accident. The production process must be properly managed 
to achieve quality standards. Quality management is concerned with controlling activities with the aim 


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 113  
of ensuring that goods and services are fit for their purpose and meet their specifications. There are two 
main methods of managing quality in a business: 
Quality control 
Historically quality control was the main method used to ensure quality standards. This was particularly 
used in manufacturing and was based on checking a sample or all goods at the end of the production 
process, to see whether they met the required standard. If they did not, they were rejected and then 
scrapped or the faults were corrected. This does protect the standard of goods to some extent, but it is 
an expensive and wasteful method. Employees may be careless, as they know work will be corrected.  
The alternative method of quality assurance puts the customer first and seeks to ensure that they 
receive the quality of goods or service that is in line with their expectations.  
Quality assurance 
Quality assurance aims to develop a quality culture throughout the firm using approaches such as total 
quality management (TQM). Every employee and each part of the production process has a target of 
“right first time” or zero defects. Business can gain an award (ISO9001) to show that they are effective 
in quality management. 
In quality assurance there is more emphasis on employee responsibility to get things right, rather than 
checking by inspectors.  
The process starts from receiving raw materials which are checked for quality, before they are used, and 
continues throughout the production process. This method even includes the administration of the 
business. It may also involve meetings of management and staff, called quality circles, where 
improvements to quality are suggested and management then make a decision as to whether to 
implement the ideas generated. 
Advantages of quality assurance are: 
 Costs are reduced because there is less wastage and re-working of faulty products, as the 
product is checked at every stage 
 It can help improve worker motivation, as workers have more ownership and recognition for 
their work 
 It can help break down “us and them” barriers between workers and managers, as it eliminates 
the feeling of being checked up on, as staff are empowered to make decisions about quality 
 With all staff responsible for quality, this can help the firm gain marketing advantages arising 
from its consistent level of quality 
Benefits of managing quality 
Maintaining and managing quality standards can benefit a business in a number of ways: 
 Customer loyalty – customers return, make repeat purchases and recommend the good or 
service to others, increasing sales further 
 Strong brand image and reputation for quality, attracting new customers 
 As the good or service is seen as being of good quality, it may command a higher price 
 Fewer returns, product recalls and replacements, leading to reduced costs and increased 
efficiency 
 The attraction and retention of good staff, who want to work for a business that provides quality 
goods and services 


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 114  
 Developing initiatives and changing the way a business operates, through implementing quality 
assurance methods, will help to lower inspection costs, as quality is the responsibility of 
everyone in the organisation and is embedded throughout the organisation 
These points can each help give the business a competitive advantage and support the marketing of a 
business. Customers are likely to choose to buy from businesses with a good quality reputation, even if 
they are more expensive. However, firms have to work hard to maintain and improve their reputation 
for quality, which can easily be damaged by a news story about a quality failure.  
Drawbacks/costs to a business of poor quality 
Poor quality will result in additional costs for a business: 
 Lost customers – it is very difficult and expensive to attract new customers, if old customers are 
lost 
 Legal action might be taken against the business, if its goods or services are not of the required 
standard 
 Cost of reworking or remaking products that are faulty or not up to the required standard 
 Costs of replacements or refunds 
Whichever method of improving or maintaining quality a business chooses to adopt, it will have a cost. 
A business would have to balance these costs against the benefits, to ensure the quality method chosen 
is appropriate to the business needs. These include: 
• Costs of inspection and checking for quality control 
• Cost of training for implementing quality assurance; this may involve a change in working 
practices in the organisation and therefore will require a significant investment in training for all 
staff, to ensure that quality standards are consistently met by the business 
• Cost of time for quality circle meetings and implementing initiatives that arise from such 
meetings 
The sales process and customer service 
Sales is the final part of the distribution process and is extremely important, as this is how the business 
generates revenue. Customer service can be defined as the methods used by a business to look after its 
current and futures customers. If a business wants customers to return and to gain and maintain a good 
reputation, it will need to provide good customer service.  
Sales process 
This can be broken down into stages, from attracting a customer’s attention, through to concluding the 
sale. Although this is normally seen as being operated by a sales person, the same process also applies 
to telephone sales and e-sales where the “selling” is undertaken through a website. In order for the 
process to be successful, there are certain key factors that must be addressed: 
Product knowledge – sales people must have strong knowledge about the good or service they are 
selling. If they do not then the customer will not have confidence in what they are buying and if they 
make false statements then consumer protection law might apply. 
Customer engagement – once a potential customer shows an interest in a product then the sales 
process must engage them in providing information about what it is they are interested in and showing 
them how purchasing the item will benefit them. This process might well start with establishing what 
exactly the customer is looking for, so options can be presented. 


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 115  
Speed and efficiency of service – consumers are busy people. They do not expect to wait too long to be 
engaged in a sales conversation, unless the product is in very high demand. In many cases there will be 
competitors, which could be easier or faster to purchase from. Amazon have set, as a priority, a high 
speed selling process. 
Concluding the sale – there must be appropriate methods for agreeing on the sale. This might be 
signing a contract or clicking an online button linked to a credit card payment. In a shop, there may be 
different payment options that are acceptable – and some that are not. These must meet the business 
and customer requirements. 
Post-sales service – a good sales process will follow up a purchase to see if everything is “OK” and 
determine how things could be improved. As well as the customer feeling their opinion is valued, it 
means the business can improve its selling process.  
Response to customer feedback – having gathered feedback from customers then the business should 
learn from it and make changes if appropriate. However, changes may not be appropriate in some 
cases, as all customers would like their purchases to be cheaper! Nevertheless, changes could be made 
to the product and how it is promoted, as well as to the selling process.  
The benefits of getting the sales process right are partly immediate, as more sales are made. Some retail 
businesses set targets for their managers that every person who visits the store should leave having 
bought something. Many tourist destinations, including airport duty free shops, will direct all visitors 
through the shopping area to encourage unplanned sales. Benefits are also long term, satisfied 
customers will come again and they will tell their friends which will generate sales. Dis-satisfied 
customers however, will tell far more people, which may damage a firm’s reputation in the longer term. 
Therefore, getting the sales process right is absolutely critical, particularly when a business is operating 
in a hugely competitive market where lots of substitute products exist. 
The importance of customer service 
Customer service can now be applied to the selling process. The following are usually considered to be 
essential in achieving happy customers: 
 The good or service must meet customer needs and wants i.e. it must be of the expected 
quality. It should also be reliable and safe. Delivery is increasingly important as more shopping 
takes place on line and facilities such as free delivery, choosing time slots and click and collect 
are all valued by customers. 
 Product information is also important. The legal requirements must be met, for example in 
terms of product description in food and clothing. Customers expect goods and services to be 
accurately described. This is especially important for online sales. Product information can also 
include product reviews. 
 Sales and promotional activities need to create a positive experience for the customer. The 
attitudes of employees who engage with customers should be positive and professional. 
 Pre and post-sales service provided should be positive and appropriate, for example user 
training, helplines and servicing. Customers often need reassurance after they have bought 
something that they have made the right choice or they may need help in using a product 
properly. Employees will need to be well trained, not just in terms of product knowledge, but 
also how and when they communicate with customers. Follow up communication can also 
provide valuable market research information as well as reassuring the customer about their 
purchase. 
Benefits of good customer service 


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 116  
The potential benefits to the firm from providing a consistently high level of customer service include: 
 Increased sales – satisfied customers are also more likely to try out other goods/services 
produced or provided by the same business  
 Customer loyalty – more likely to be a source of repeat business and to recommend the 
business to friends and family, creating new customers 
 Enhanced public image – this helps build a brand and provides protection if there is a slip-up in 
customer service 
 More effective workforce – satisfied customers help create a positive working environment. 
Employees who deliver good customer service receive their customers’ appreciation, rather than 
complaints, and are further motivated to offer good customer service 
 Cheaper costs – good customer service will reduce the number of complaints and refunds, which 
will save the business costs in providing expensive customer service departments 
Dangers in providing poor customer service  
Recent research has highlighted the dangers to a business of providing poor customer service i.e. the 
cost of customer dissatisfaction: 
 As satisfaction levels drop, loyalty drops faster: there is a significant drop in loyalty between 
customers who say they are “very satisfied” and “somewhat satisfied” - sometimes as much as 
50%. A dangerous policy in many organisations is to ignore this fact and to just try and improve 
their combined score, rather than trying to increase the number of “very satisfied” customers. 
 Problems drive customers away: there is typically a 25% drop in loyalty amongst customers who 
experience a problem. In revenue terms, this can be the equivalent of losing some, or all, of the 
revenue from one in every four customers who have experienced a problem. 
 More customers have problems than you think: research shows that as many as 50% of an 
organisation’s customers may actually be experiencing problems at any one time. Only 5% of 
those experiencing a problem may complain to the firm’s complaints or customer services 
department.  Therefore, as many as 95% of customers who experience a problem may say 
nothing to the business at all! 
 Unhappy customers spread the word: research confirms that on average customers tell twice as 
many people about a bad experience than they do about a good one. This means, depending on 
the industry, between 5 and 10 people are told about a bad experience. Today, negative word-
of-mouth happens much quicker and to a much greater scale, due to use of the internet and the 
power of social networks. 
Effective customer service and response pays: research also confirms the importance of effectively 
responding to customers when they do complain. Customers can be very demanding but, with an 
effective response, it is still possible to obtain a more loyal customer afterwards, than you had before 
they experienced the problem! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 117  
2.4 Making financial decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Business calculations Gross profit and net profit 
Calculation and interpretation of financial data 
Understanding business 
performance 
Using and interpreting quantitative data 
Use and limitations of financial data 
 
Business calculations 
Every business and every entrepreneur needs an understanding of the financial performance of the 
business they are involved in. There is a need to understand financial terms and also to be able 
understand and interpret financial data. Businesses also need to be able to make financial calculations, 
for example measuring the financial outcome of possible investment opportunities. 
The basic financial terms were considered in Theme 1 in terms of costs, revenue and profit. In this 
section, we will consider profit calculations in more detail. 
Profit can be measured and calculated as gross profit and net profit. Gross profit is the amount the 
business makes from its actual business operation. From gross profit the business has to then pay for its 
expenses, which will leave it with its net profit. This is the figure that shows how well the business is 
really doing.  
The formula for gross profit and net profit are as follows: 
GROSS PROFIT = SALES REVENUE - COST OF SALES 
NET PROFIT = GROSS PROFIT - OTHER OPERATING COSTS AND INTEREST 
 
Here are two examples which illustrate these formulae in action: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 118  
 
 Sales Cost of Sales Gross profit Expenses 
and interest 
Net profit (or 
loss) 
Business A £100,000 £40,000 £60,000 £35,000 £25,000 
(profit) 
Business B £100,000 £70,000 £30,000 £40,000 £10,000 (loss) 
 Total sales greater than total costs 
Total costs greater than total sales 
Total sales = total costs 
= Net profit 
= Loss 
= Break-even 
 
Whatever the result, profit, loss or breaking even a business will always need to review its performance 
and look at how it might be improved. Can costs be decreased? If so, how… and by when? Can revenue 
be increased? Should the price stay the same? Can more be sold? Is there a need for further investment 
to decrease costs or increase revenue? 
Profitability ratios 
The accounts of a business can be used to tell us how much profit a business has made in a period.  But, 
how can a business tell if that level of profit shows good business performance or not?  One way to 
judge how “profitable” a business is to calculate profitability ratios.  There are two main profitability 
ratios: 
• Gross profit margin 
• Net profit margin 
Let’s look at how they are calculated and used. 
Gross profit margin % 
This ratio compares the gross profit earned in a period with the revenues of that period. It is calculated 
using this formula: 
 
The table shows some examples of this calculation: 
Business A B C 
 
Revenue £ 200,000 500,000 1,000,000 



===== PDF PAGE 120 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 119  
Cost of sales £ 100,000 300,000 750,000 
Gross profit £ 100,000 200,000 250,000 
 
Gross profit margin 50% 40% 25% 
In the table, it can be seen that Business C makes the highest gross profit of £250,000.  However, this is 
because it has a much higher revenue than Businesses A or B.  In terms of gross profit relative to 
revenues, Business A has the highest gross profit margin of 50%, followed by Business B of 40%.   
The gross profit margin shows that Business A makes a gross profit of £0.50 for each £1 of revenue.  
That is twice the level of Business C, which only makes a gross profit of £0.25 for each £1 of revenue. 
Why might the gross profit margin of these three businesses vary so much? Well, they might operate in 
different industries? If they are in the same industry, then Business C might be less efficient than the 
other two or its selling price might be much lower. A high gross profit margin will mean that the 
business is providing high value added. Price of cups of tea and coffee at roadside cafes are good 
examples of items with very high gross profit margins. 
Net profit margin % 
Net profit is what is left after all the costs, expenses and interest of a business have been taken from its 
sales revenue.  The net profit margin compares the net profit earned in a period with the revenues of 
that period. It is calculated using this formula: 
 
    Net                     Net Profit 
    Profit           =                               x 100 
    Margin                Revenue 
 
Look at the following example: 
Monthly net profit for January 2016 £’000 
Sales  400 
Cost of sales 200 
Gross profit  200 
Other operating expenses/interest 150 
NET PROFIT   50 
 
Net profit margin 12.5% 
 
In the profit statement above, the business has made a net profit of £50,000.  The net profit is 
calculated by subtracting all the business expenses/overheads and interest, totalling £150,000, from the 


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 120  
gross profit of £200,000.  In the period, the business has made a net profit margin of 12.5%.  That 
means that it has converted 12.5% or 12.5p of each pound of sales into net profit! 
The net profit margin is the most significant out of the two profitability ratios, as it shows a business: 
• How effectively a business turns its sales into profit 
• How efficiently a business is run, in particular, is it keeping its operating costs as low as it can? 
• Whether a business has been able to “add value” throughout the production process i.e. a 
business with a high net profit margin must be doing something right! 
On its own, the net profit margin is useful information.  However, it is even more useful if comparisons 
can be made between: 
• changes in net profit margin over time, for example month by month or comparing different 
years 
• net profit margins of competitors in the same market 
 
Look at this example: 
Example  Company A 
£’000 
Company B 
£’000 
Company C 
£’000 
Sales  150 250 500 
Net profit  50 25 125 
Net profit margin  33% 10% 25% 
 
Looking at the financial information given in the example, it can be seen that: 
• Company A makes a higher net profit than Company B, even though its sales are lower. It has a 
higher net profit margin and is clearly controlling its expenses, overheads and cost of sales well 
compared to the other two businesses. 
 
Investment ratio – average rate of return (ARR) 
A business will always be looking to improve its performance and its profitability. Most methods of 
achieving these improvements will involve investment. An investment is where a sum of money, known 
as capital, is spent today in order to get a benefit in the future. There are many different reasons for 
investment. These include growth of the business, replacing worn out machinery or modernisation and 
mechanisation.  
In order to work out whether the investment is worth taking, there are various calculations a business 
can make based on the cost of the project and the future returns it will provide. One of these is known 
as the average rate of return. 
Average rate of return (ARR) 
Average rate of return is a simple method of calculating whether a project is worthwhile. It calculates 
the annual average return for a project expressed as a percentage. This can be compared with other 
projects on which the money could be spent or the interest it could earn if saved. It can also be 


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 121  
compared with the cost of borrowing money to fund the project, if the business does not have any 
savings or retained profit that it can use. 
The formula for the average rate of return or ARR is: 
 
ARR (%) = Average annual profit (total profit from the investment ÷ number of years) x 100 
        Initial cost of the investment  
    
 
For example a fast food business could expand to operate a delivery service. This would mean buying a 
van for £30,000. The van would last 5 years and the business has calculated that it would make an extra 
profit of £22,500 during the 5 years.  
ARR (%) = (£22,500 ÷ 5) x 100 = £4,500 x 100 = 15% 
         £30,000      £30,000       
Depending on how reliable the firm’s profit estimates are, this would be quite a good return even if the 
business has to borrow money to fund the investment. 
ARR is often used to compare different projects to see which one has the highest return. The 
percentage financial return is not, however, the only factor to be considered. In comparing projects 
other factors such as risk, i.e. how likely the project is to succeed, must also be taken into account. The 
initial cost is also relevant as if this is too much, however high the ARR is, the project may not be 
affordable for the business. 
Understanding business performance 
As well as financial data, there are other sources of quantitative information that a business can find 
and use to help it with effective and accurate decision making. This data can be displayed in tables, 
graphs or charts.  
 
Marketing is one particular area where quantitative business data is commonly found, for example 
market research and sales data. Operations and human resources will also generate quantitative data in 
areas such as productivity, costs and staff retention rates. It should also be remembered that the 
business and its decisions are influenced by the external environment, market data (is the market 
growing or declining) and information about the economy, such as whether the economy is booming, if 
interest rates are set to rise etc. All this information will be invaluable to help the business with 
effective decision making. 
Data presentation and analysis 
If a business gathers data first hand, through primary research, it will need to be presented in a way that 
is easy to understand and interpret for the key decision makers of the business. This will involve 
combining and presenting the data into a format that will enable easy analysis. This may also be the 
case with regard to secondary data, dependent on the type of data that has been gathered. 
Quantitative data is much easier to present compared to qualitative responses, which are often difficult 
to combine and summarise. 


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 122  
There are many examples of data presentation which allow, for example, market research results to be 
clearly seen.  These include tally charts, bar charts, pie charts, line charts, pictograms and tables of data. 
In other cases, data can be combined in order to provide average scores to a particular question asked.  
 
 
Use of computers has made presentation of data very easy and some programmes will allow data to be 
recorded, totalled and displayed. In some cases this can be done automatically direct, for example, from 
questionnaire responses.  
Data analysis and interpretation is also undertaken by firms, from data presentation. This could mean 
separating out responses for different groups of people, for example male and female. This can also be 
displayed using data presentation techniques. For example the average price people are willing to pay 
for a haircut may be £20, but the average for women is £30 and the average for men is £10. Therefore, 
a new hairdressing business would not want to charge £20 to everyone and would have a separate price 
list for men and women. 
Market  and marketing data 
One of the objectives of the business is often to increase market share. This is normally measured as the 
sales of the business compared to the total market sales expressed as a percentage. Alongside this 
objective, the market itself might be growing (or declining) so it is possible to have higher sales and a 
lower market share if the market is growing faster than the sales of a business.  
• Market information is generally available through secondary data for the industry concerned and 
includes population information such as age distribution, income levels and employment and 
unemployment information. 
• Marketing data can be used to measure the effectiveness of the marketing strategy or marketing 
plans of a business. If a business spends money on advertising, it will want to know whether the 
awareness and the sales of the product increase. If they introduce a sales promotion has the 
increase in sales made it worthwhile? 
An example of sales of a business, Easy Store, compared to the total market is given in the table: 
 2013 2014 2015 2016 
Easy Store sales £2m £3m £4m £3.5m 
Total market sales £20m £24m £36m £28m 
Easy Store  
% market share 10% 12.5% 11.1% 12.5% 
The data shows that:  
• Market size has increased from 2013 to 2015. It then decreases between 2015 and 2016 
• In 2014, Easy Store’s sales and market share had increased compared to 2013 



===== PDF PAGE 124 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 123  
• In 2015, Easy Store’s sales had again increased, but the market size had increased faster, 
therefore its market share had decreased compared to the year before 
• In 2016, Easy Store’s sales decreased, but because the market size had decreased faster than 
Easy Store sales, its market share increased 
Based on this information the business will consider what actions it should take. Often the market size is 
changing through factors outside of the business’s control. Therefore a firm’s market share percentage 
will better show how well the business is performing in relation to the external market conditions it 
faces. If the total market size is falling, a business might decide to cut costs to maintain profit levels. It 
also might change the nature of the products it sells or the price it charges for its products. 
Limitations of financial information 
As seen with the financial performance data considered earlier, care must be taken when interpreting 
the data. For example, trying to compare the efficiency of businesses using sales figures will not be valid 
unless there is reference to productivity i.e. the amount of work produced per employee or how high 
the sales are of a business as a percentage of its costs.  
There are many other limitations in using data, particularly financial data: 
Accuracy – does the data represent the actual data that was collected? Are there any results included 
that have been guessed or made up? 
Representative – is this year’s financial data useful to compare with previous years? There may be new 
products or new markets that have been targeted or new stores opened, which would show more sales, 
but equally higher costs. Data for seasonal products will also need to be interpreted correctly as, for 
example, ice cream sales always go up in the summer. 
Out of date – all data is out of date – the question is by how much and is it still of use? Sales figures will 
refer to last month, last quarter or even last year. Cost data will be similarly historic. Sometimes the 
time, effort and cost of collecting and analysing the data too regularly may not be worthwhile, as it will 
still not necessarily be an accurate guide as to present and future performance. 
Qualitative data may be needed – Most data collected and analysed on a regular basis is quantitative. 
This will be limiting however. Profits and sales figures may indicate that the launch of a new product has 
been successful. However, it could be that the customers have tried the product once, but do not like 
certain features of a new model or product and have no intention of buying it again or are only buying 
the product because there is no alternative. The business can and therefore should support the 
quantitative data with some in depth qualitative data. This can ask questions about attitudes and values 
and the combined results will provide a much more reliable basis for management decisions. 
It should be remembered that all data, marketing data, financial data, including ratios, operations data 
and human resources data are only the tools for the decisions. They do not make the decisions – the 
managers will do that. Managers will take into account the data and all the circumstances faced by the 
business including internal and external factors and the most important stakeholder objectives when 
making decisions, to ensure hopefully they are making the right ones! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 124  
2.5 Human Resource Decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Organisational structures Different organisation structures and their use 
Achieving effective communication 
Different ways of working 
Effective recruitment Different job roles and responsibilities 
The recruitment process 
Effective training and 
development 
Methods of training and development 
Purposes of training and development 
Motivation The importance of motivating employees 
Methods of motivation: financial and non-financial 
 
Organisational structures 
As businesses grow in size and the number of employees increases, they will need an internal structure 
to show the relationship between employees, managers, departments and locations. The chosen 
structure will depend on the type of business and its characteristics. Factors such as cost, control and 
communication will all influence the most suitable organisational structure for a particular business.  
Organisation charts 
The simplest way to show how a business is organised is to look at an organisation chart.  This shows 
the management hierarchy in a business and works from top to bottom. Here is an example of an 
organisational chart: 
 



===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 125  
As can be seen, the business is arranged into different levels i.e. a hierarchy. Roles are identified and 
lines of management and responsibility are clearly shown. The Managing Director is at the top of the 
organisational structure and he/she has four people reporting directly to him i.e. the different directors. 
The Marketing Director has the different marketing managers reporting into him/her and the sales 
teams will then report into the marketing managers.  
Key job roles and responsibilities 
A large business will have employees at many different levels of the organisational hierarchy. With the 
exception of those employees at the bottom of the structure, these employees will have various 
management responsibilities including being in charge of the layer below them in the organisational 
structure. There are many different roles that can be found in a business. The key roles are summarised 
here: 
• Directors – in a large company, a director will be in charge of a department of functional area, 
for example the Finance Director. They will be part of the Board of Directors who manage the 
company. The most senior director will be the Managing Director. 
• Managers or senior managers – managers will be responsible for a significant part of the 
business operation and will be in charge of the performance of a number of employees. 
• Team leaders or supervisors – in a large business teams of workers will often have one person 
who is more senior. As well as working as part of the team, they will have some responsibilities 
in making sure that the team operates effectively. 
• Operational staff – these are the employees who directly do the work, such as the 
manufacturing or providing the service. 
• Support staff – alongside the operational hierarchy of the business, there be some employees 
who are called on to assist in any area of the organisation. They generally have specialist 
knowledge or skills.  IT support staff are a good example, but this may include less specialist 
roles, such as cleaning, catering and caretaking staff. 
Span of control 
One of the features of an organisation chart is it shows the span of control. Span of control is the 
number of employees for whom a manager is directly responsible.  The two diagrams below illustrate 
two different spans of control: 
 
A span of control of 7 would be considered to be quite wide. Contrast this with a span of 3 below, which 
would be considered narrow. 



===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 126  
 
There is no ideal span of control as it will depend upon a number of factors such as: 
• The experience and personality of the manager 
• The type of business - if being a line manager requires a great deal of close supervision, then a 
narrow span might be appropriate 
• The skills and attitudes of the employees – if employees are highly motivated, highly skilled and 
highly qualified, then adopting wide spans of control could be more suitable 
A flat organisational structure will have a wider span of control, compared to a tall hierarchical 
structure, which will have a narrow span of control. As there will be less layers of management in the 
hierarchy, a wider span of control tends to save money for an organisation. There are also benefits, as 
communication will be easier from the top to the bottom of the organisation, but there could be less 
control in terms of managing the quality of work. 
Chains of command 
The chain of command in an organisation chart, shows the lines of authority within the business.  In the 
example below, Sam is responsible for Eve, Chris and Brenda. Further down the chain, Brenda is 
responsible for Sharon and Dawn. This means that Sam would directly communicate with his three 
subordinates. Brenda would then pass on any relevant messages to her team, as she would be their line 
manager. Any issues that Sharon and Dawn may have should be directly communicated to Brenda, 
rather than these two members of staff communicating with Eve, Chris or even missing a layer and 
going directly to Sam. If Sharon or Dawn, had a particular concern regarding Brenda however, they 
could directly communicate with Sam, as he is ultimately in charge of everybody. 
 
If a business has a wide span of control and very few layers in the hierarchy, there will be a short chain 
of command and with a narrow span of control, there is a long chain of command. 



===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 127  
Choice of organisational structure 
There are various ways of arranging the business organisational structure. These are often summarised 
as: 
• Flat: the organisational structure has few layers from the top of the organisation to the bottom 
of it, short chains of command and wide spans of control 
• Hierarchical or tall: the organisational structure has many layers from the top of the 
organisation to the bottom of it, long chains of command and narrow spans of control 
 
In the diagram, the hierarchical or tall organisation has six layers and narrow spans of control. In 
contrast, the flat organisation has four layers and wider spans of control. The choice of which is most 
suitable will depend on the nature of the business and the situation in which it operates.  
When a business grows, it becomes more difficult to control, co-ordinate and organise. Therefore in 
some cases, it might be necessary to add in additional managerial positions into the hierarchy, creating 
another layer in the organisation.  
In reverse, if a business is decreasing in size or aiming just to reduce costs, it may well decide to take out 
a layer of management. This process is known as delayering. Delayering may help to improve 
communication within the business, although it will also reduce promotion opportunities, as a layer of 
management has now been removed. This may impact on motivation levels, as well as the fact that staff 
will be expected to take on more responsibility, which may increase the costs of the business through 
increased levels of training. 
Centralisation and decentralisation 
One of the issues that a business needs to address is where decision-making power is in the 
organisational structure. The key question is whether it is kept with senior management at the 
headquarters or the top of the organisation (centralised) or whether it is delegated further down the 
hierarchy, away from the centre and possibly in different locations (decentralised). 



===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 128  
Most large businesses do use some decentralisation, especially if they operate from several locations or 
have added new products or markets. The issue is really how much independence business units or 
groups within a business should have when it comes to key decisions, especially those that might affect 
the business as a whole. 
Centralised structures 
Businesses that have a centralised structure keep decision-making firmly at the top of the hierarchy, 
amongst the most senior management.  
Fast-food businesses use a predominantly centralised structure to ensure that control is maintained 
over their many thousands of outlets.  The need to ensure consistency of customer experience and 
quality at every location are the main reasons why centralisation is chosen. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of centralisation are: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Easier to implement common policies and 
practices for the business as a whole 
 There are often more layers in the 
organisation, which will increase costs  
 Prevents other parts of the business from 
becoming too independent 
 Local or junior managers are likely to be 
much closer to customer needs, therefore 
the best decisions for the local area may 
not be taken by the business 
 Easier to co-ordinate and control from the 
centre, for example with budgets, which 
prevents overspending 
 Lack of authority down the hierarchy may 
reduce manager motivation 
 Economies of scale and other savings are 
easier to achieve; for example, all 
purchasing may be done centrally, which 
will mean cheaper unit costs due to bulk 
purchasing 
 Customer service does not benefit from 
flexibility and speed in local decision-
making 
 Greater use of specialist staff, for example 
in areas such as human resources, finance 
and marketing 
 
 Quicker decision-making (usually) and 
easier to show strong leadership 
 
Decentralised structures 
In a decentralised structure, decision-making is spread out to include more junior managers in the 
hierarchy, as well as individual business units, such as specific stores, or trading locations. 
Good examples of businesses which use a decentralised structure include the major supermarket 
chains. Each supermarket has a store manager who can make specific decisions about their particular 
store, such as staffing levels. However, bigger decisions regarding store layout are made by head office. 
In this instance, every store manager is responsible to a regional or area manager. Hotel chains are also 
particularly keen on using decentralised structures, so that local hotel managers are empowered to 
make on-the-spot decisions to handle customer problems or complaints.  
The main advantages and disadvantages of using decentralisation are: 


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 129  
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Decisions are made closer to the customer 
and therefore are more likely to reflect 
their specific needs 
 Decision-making is not necessarily looking 
to the long term future direction of the 
business 
 Better able to respond to local 
circumstances 
 More difficult to ensure consistent 
practices and policies, customers might 
prefer consistency from location to 
location 
 Improved level of customer service  May be some diseconomies of scale and 
inefficiencies across the business, for 
example staff may duplicate roles across 
different sites 
 Consistent with aiming for a flatter 
hierarchy and organisational structure 
 Nobody to provide quick and strong 
leadership when needed, for example in a 
crisis situation 
 Good way of training and developing junior 
management 
 Harder to control costs, which means the 
business may end up over-spending  
 Should improve staff motivation  
Centralised structures allow for easy communication, particularly from the top of the hierarchy 
downwards. If there is a tall hierarchical structure with many layers, it is harder for employees to 
communicate upwards than it is for managers to communicate downwards, which is explained in 
further depth in the next section. 
Decentralised organisations, particularly those on different sites, find that communication is more 
difficult. If the locations are in different countries then oral communication can be particularly hard to 
achieve, particularly if they are not in the same time zones. Electronic communication, such as emails, is 
often most effective here, although there is a danger of email overload and that some emails will not be 
read and therefore not actioned.  
In large multi-location businesses, there may even be a communication department which has the 
responsibility to make sure that communication methods used by the business are appropriate and 
effective. 
Effective communication  
There is a strong link between the organisational structure and the effectiveness of the methods used 
for internal communication within a business. These can be compared between flat and hierarchical 
organisational structures, as well as centralised and decentralised organisational structures. 
Consideration should also be given as to how communication works up and down the organisation. 
There are two types of communication that are considered here: 
Written communication: letters, memos, emails, reports.  
These are likely to increase in quantity, as the size of the organisation increases. In a tall hierarchical 
structure, written communication from top to bottom of a chain of command is likely to be slow. It is 
also likely to be used greatly. Even email can produce a large quantity of communication in order to 
keep layers of the organisation informed. Communication up the organisation is very difficult. The layers 


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 130  
act as a “filter” preventing messages getting to the higher levels. In a flat structure, communication is 
therefore quicker and easier, due to less layers being in existence.  
Mass communication techniques can also be effective, whatever type of organisational structure that is 
in place, for example a letter sent from the managing director can be sent to all staff. This ensures that 
the message sent is consistent.  
Oral (verbal) communication: face to face, telephone.  
Within tall, hierarchical organisations, verbal messages can get distorted or lost. Communication may be 
slow, as there is no one to receive a message. This means that messages have to be left and may not be 
received. With flat organisations, the personal contact can be motivating for subordinates and 
informing for managers. Upwards communication is much easier in a flat organisation, due to there 
being less layers in the hierarchy.  
Barriers to communication 
Different organisational structures will have strengths and potential weaknesses related to the use of 
communication: 
• Centralised structures allow for easy communication, particularly from the top of the hierarchy 
downwards.  
• Decentralised organisations, particularly those on different sites, find that communication is 
more difficult.  
• In large multi-location businesses, there may be a need for a communication department to 
ensure that communication methods used by the business are appropriate and effective. 
• If there is tall, hierarchical structure with many layers it is harder for employees to communicate 
upwards, than it is for managers to communicate downwards, as previously mentioned. 
Aiming to achieve effective communication is one thing – actually doing it is another. There are several 
barriers to communication, including: 
Barrier Explanation 
Language The message might use vocabulary that is not understood by the receiver, for example 
too much use of technical or financial jargon. In some cases, messages may be from 
different countries and therefore be written in different languages. 
Noise Various things stop a message from getting through or being heard, for example poor 
connection, background noise, distractions, too many people speaking at once. This can 
be the case in open plan offices, where large volumes of people work in one room to 
encourage socialisation and openness. However, this can also create distractions and 
lots of noise! 
Overload Too much information can cause problems, for example slow down decision-making. 
Employees will often get too many communications, some of which will be important, 
some urgent and some not requiring any attention. E-mails have made the overload 
situation worse for many workers, as sometimes a receiver may receive over 100 a day! 


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 131  
Barrier Explanation 
Emotion The relationship between the sender and receiver of communication might adversely 
affect the message. Emotions are difficult to read, particularly in emails, and as a result 
the message could be ignored or misinterpreted. 
Gaps Too many intermediaries, for example too many layers in the hierarchy through which a 
message has to be passed, might prevent or distort the message. 
Inconsistency If people receive conflicting or inconsistent messages, then they may ignore or block 
them and therefore important actions may not take place. 
The impact of insufficient or excessive communication 
Two of the most common complaints about communication is that there is too little or too much! 
Insufficient communication can often lead to poor motivation, as workers believe they are not 
important parts of the organisation. This can also lead to failure to complete jobs, as employees are not 
fully aware of the job’s requirements. Alternatively, employees complete the job, but not correctly as 
they do not have all the required details in order to complete it successfully. 
Equally too much communication can also lead to workers being ineffective or inefficient. Excessive 
communication can mean unnecessary work acknowledging and responding to the communications. 
This can slow down the worker’s output. It can also cause quality issues, if the communication keeps 
changing the job requirements or contradicts other communications that have been received. 
Motivation is best when communication is clear and sufficient.  
Different ways of working 
Nowadays, there are many different ways of working – in fact more than there has even been! These 
should be considered from both the employee and employers point of views. In some cases, these will 
match, whereas in others the interest of the business may not allow the employee to work in a 
particular way, for example full-time versus part-time positions. Some of the more common types of 
working arrangements are summarised below:  
Permanent 
contracts 
These provide the most certainty for the employee, but are less flexible for the 
business. Employees have to be given a contract which gives details of pay, 
holiday, hours of work, notice requirements and codes of behaviour. All of these 
must conform to employee law. As workers will be secure in their job, they may 
be better motivated and productivity levels may rise. 
Temporary 
contracts 
Temporary contracts are normally for a fixed period of time. This will be suitable 
for businesses where they may have a particular contract with no guaranteed or 
similar work to follow. It can also be used as a trial period for workers. From the 
employee’s point of view, it does not offer job security and can therefore make it 
difficult to get a mortgage to buy a house for example. 
Freelance contracts These are similar to temporary workers, only normally the freelance employee is 
hired on a daily basis or just for a specific job. This is very common in some 
industries, such as the music performance industry where freelance musicians will 
be employed for a particular concert or tour. This provides flexibility for the 


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 132  
business, but no guarantee that the chosen worker will be available and therefore 
the business may not have sufficient workers to carry out a particular task. It also 
provides no job security for the employee, who may seek to find more secure 
work elsewhere. 
Full-time contracts Workers will generally have to work 5 days a week and no more than 48 hours 
(although many will work far less). Having full-time workers will give workers 
consistency in the workplace, for example relationships with customers and will 
provide the employees with a guaranteed wage that they should be able to live 
on. 
Part-time contracts Part-time workers have the same rights as full-time workers, although 
entitlements such as holidays are reduced in line with the amount of part-time 
hours worked. These provide a smaller amount of work for employees compared 
to full-time, which the member of staff may prefer, particularly if they have other 
commitments such as childcare. It will also give the business more flexibility to 
increase the part-time hours of a worker, if the business becomes busier for a 
period of time.  
Flexible or zero- 
hour contracts 
This type of contract provides no guarantee of any hours. The worker may have to 
be available for work, but is not guaranteed any. This gives employers maximum 
flexibility and is much used in catering, farming and the health service. Some 
employees like the flexibility, for example students and mothers with young 
children, but for others it makes planning family income very difficult. 
 
Technology and working from home - remote working 
The widespread adoption of low-cost, easy-to-use information technology means that many 
entrepreneurs now start and operate their businesses from home. Large businesses have also seen 
advantages in allowing their employees to work at home, for either some or all of their hours.  
Having employees as remote workers will have advantages and disadvantages. In some cases these will 
be to the worker, in other cases to the business. This works best when it benefits both the business and 
the employee and in these cases it should increase business efficiency. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 133  
 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Cheap – the business does not need to 
provide premises for the workers. 
 Employees require greater self-discipline – it 
is easy to get distracted! 
 Very little travelling, although customers 
and suppliers might still need to be 
visited. 
 Work is often interrupted, for example by 
callers to the home or by family. 
 Work can be combined with domestic 
tasks and responsibilities, for example 
child care.  This can mean significant cost 
savings for the employee and can also 
allow businesses to retain valued 
workers. 
 Work never goes away – it is difficult to 
separate work from home life, which can 
increase stress levels! 
 Environmental benefits - lower carbon 
footprint. 
 Potentially lonely for the employee – this 
may lead to a lack of motivation, as there is 
no social interaction from colleagues. 
 More flexible hours might be possible, as 
workers may prefer to work early or late 
to fit in with other commitments.  
 More difficult for the business to monitor 
and control work being undertaken. 
 
Effective recruitment  
Recruitment and selection is a process that involves: 
• Identifying the need for a job 
• Defining the requirements of the position and the job holder 
• Advertising the position 
• Choosing the most appropriate person for the job 
Recruitment is a vitally important activity for a business of any size. Indeed, the success of any business 
depends to a large extent on the quality of its staff.  Recruiting employees with the correct skills can add 
value to a business and recruiting workers at a wage or salary that the business can afford, will reduce 
costs.  Employees should therefore be carefully selected, managed and retained, just like any other 
resource. 


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 134  
 
Job analysis 
When a vacancy arises in an organisation, perhaps due to somebody leaving a position for a job in 
another firm, the organisation will need to decide whether the job is still really required, before starting 
the actual recruitment process itself. This stage is called the job analysis.  
Many small businesses have only one worker and many large businesses do not replace workers if they 
leave. If the business decides that there is a vacant position, the next stage of the job analysis process is 
to decide what type of worker is needed. In order to help this process, the key documents of a job 
description and a person specification will be produced.  
Key documents 
Job description 
• A detailed explanation of the roles and responsibilities of the post advertised 
• Most applicants will ask for this before applying for the job – they want to know what the job 
will involve! Making sure this is sufficiently detailed, will make the recruitment process much 
more efficient for the organisation, as it will help to prevent unsuitable candidates applying for 
vacant positions  
• Refers to the post available, rather than the specific type of person the organisation is looking 
for 
Person specification 
• Sets out the kind of qualifications, skills, experience and personal attributes a successful 
candidate should possess 
• A vital tool in comparing and assessing the suitability of job applicants 
• Refers to the person rather than the post 
Internal and external recruitment 



===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 135  
When looking for people to fill a vacancy that has arisen, the business may already have employees in 
the organisation who would be suitable. This is known as internal recruitment. If there are no suitable 
internal candidates, then the business will need applicants from outside of the firm. This is known as 
external recruitment. Of course both internal and external recruitment can be used. This is often the 
case for senior management appointments. 
The most popular ways of recruiting externally are:   
• Job centres – Government agencies to help the unemployed find jobs or get training 
• Job advertisements - the most common form of external recruitment.  Where a business 
chooses to advertise will depend on the cost of advertising and the coverage needed i.e. how far 
away people will consider applying for the job 
• Recruitment agency - provides employers with details of suitable candidates for a vacancy and 
can sometimes be referred to as “head-hunters”.  They work for a fee and often specialise in 
particular employment areas, for example nursing, financial services, teacher recruitment 
• Personal recommendation - often referred to as “word of mouth” and can be a 
recommendation from a colleague at work.  A full assessment of the candidate is still needed 
however, but potentially it saves on advertising costs 
• Websites – these include general sites such as Fish4Jobs and MonsterJobs. Most agencies and 
major employers will also have their own websites with a specific link to current vacancies. In 
addition, there will be vacancy websites related to particular professions. Examples include 
farming, nursing and teaching 
Internal versus external recruitment 
The benefits and drawbacks of internal and external recruitment include the following: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 136  
 
 Benefits Drawbacks 
Internal 
recruitment  
 Cheaper and quicker to recruit and 
fill the vacancy 
 Limits the number of potential 
applicants  
 People already familiar with the 
business and how it operates, 
therefore productivity increases 
quicker  
 No new ideas can be introduced 
from outside  
 Provides opportunities for 
promotion within the business, 
which could lead to increased 
employee motivation levels and 
higher staff retention 
 May cause resentment amongst 
candidates not appointed  
 Business already knows the 
strengths and weaknesses of the 
candidate, which results in less risk 
in the recruitment process 
 Creates another vacancy which 
needs to be filled  
External 
recruitment  
 Outside people bring in new ideas   Longer process  
 Larger pool of workers from which 
to find the best candidate  
 More expensive process, due to 
advertising and interviews 
required  
 People have a wider range of 
experience  
 Selection process may not be 
effective enough to reveal the best 
candidate  
 
Application process 
The most suitable methods of selecting new employees will very much depend on the type of job and 
the sort of person that is required. Using the wrong method might mean recruiting an unsuitable 
worker or missing the best candidate for the position. The business must also take into account the legal 
restrictions on recruitment, such as laws banning most types of discrimination. 
When recruiting externally, the business will almost certainly have to produce a job advertisement.  The 
objectives of the advertisement are to: 
• Inform the audience of potential candidates about the vacancy  
• Provide enough information to both inform and interest possible applicants 
• Help filter out unsuitable applicants 
• Obtain the most number of suitably qualified applicants for the post advertised 
The advertisement must not discriminate and should provide details of how to apply for the vacancy.  


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 137  
For many jobs, a business will ask applicants to provide a curriculum vitae (CV).  This is a document that 
the applicant designs providing details such as:   
Personal details Name, address, nationality, national insurance number 
Educational history  Including examination results, schools/universities attended, 
professional qualifications  
Previous employment history  Names of employers, position held, main achievements, 
remuneration package, reasons for leaving  
Suitability and reasons for 
applying for the job  
A chance for applicants to “sell themselves” 
Names of referees  Often is a recent employer or a person who knows the applicant well 
and are ideally independent and therefore non-biased 
Sometimes job applicants are asked to fill in a firm’s own application form.  This is different from a CV in 
that the employer designs it and sends it to applicants, but it will still ask for much of the same 
information.  It has the benefit over a CV in that a business is able to design the form to its exact needs 
and ask specific questions that it feels are important to help it select the best candidate for the vacant 
position. Increasingly application forms are completed online. 
Once a business has received all the applications, they need to be analysed and the most appropriate 
candidates identified. This process is known as short listing. The short listed applicants will then 
normally be invited to the business for further selection tests or interviews. From this selection process, 
the most suited candidate for the vacant position will be chosen and an offer letter will be sent to the 
candidate. If this candidate agrees to take up the post, the new employee must be given an 
employment contract once he/she has started work. This is an important legal document that describes 
the obligations of the employee and employer to each other (terms and conditions), as well as the initial 
remuneration package and a number of other important details.  
Recruiting the best staff is one of the most important decisions that businesses make. They produce 
many benefits for the business, as well as providing value for money. Some of the benefits to the 
business are: 
 Increase in output and productivity which makes a business more efficient, leading to lower 
average unit costs and potentially higher profits. The new member of staff will enjoy his/her new 
position and be motivated to work hard! 
 Different ideas that increase the success in terms of new products or just new ways of doing 
things 
 Improvements in quality and customer service that means the business gains new customers or 
repeat business from existing customers 
 Increase in staff retention as the right person is appointed for the position in the first place. 
Therefore, they are unlikely to leave because they have taken on the “wrong” job and therefore 
do not like either the job itself, the business or both! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 138  
Effective training and development 
All businesses will need to train their staff. New staff will need to know how the business operates and 
how to do their job well, whereas existing staff will need to be trained in new processes or on new 
equipment. Some staff may require further training, so they can take on more advanced or difficult jobs 
in the future.  
Training can be defined as: 
The process of increasing the knowledge and skills of the workforce to enable them to perform their 
jobs effectively 
Training costs can be significant in any business. Many employers are prepared to pay these costs 
because they expect their business to benefit from employees' development and progress. 
Methods of training  
Training can take place in many different ways. These can be formal or informal and be organised 
through self-learning programmes or external organisations, as well as being provided at the place of 
work. In large organisations, training and development is part of the performance review process, which 
will recommend what training is required and how it can be arranged for each individual in the 
organisation. 
Type of training Description 
Formal This often takes place outside the workplace at colleges, training organisations or 
other similar provider premises. Training outside of the place of work is otherwise 
known as “off the job” training. 
 This allows the employee to concentrate on the training provided and to 
receive specialist training from expert providers.  
 It can however, be more expensive than training provided “in house” or at the 
place of work by other employees, as it means that for existing workers, they 
will not be carrying out their normal work. 
Informal This normally takes place at the workplace and is often based on observation or 
being “shown how to do a particular job” by a colleague who already does the 
same job. This is otherwise known as “on the job” training.  
 This can be much cheaper than formal training, as it is provided by existing 
employees and no specialist trainers have to be paid. 
 It may result in the employee being trained by copying poor practice, rather 
than learning from scratch the best way of doing a specific job. 
Self-learning The widespread use of the internet means that training can often take place at 
home, linked to online tests, to ensure that the training has been understood. 
 Some self-motivated workers and some types of training work well through 
this method. It can be cheaper, as travelling costs are reduced. 


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 139  
Type of training Description 
 It is not suitable for all employees or all types of jobs. It is also reliant on the 
employee carrying out the training independently. In this case, not all aspects 
of the training may be understood and two way dialogue cannot be 
established to clarify specific points. 
Ongoing training As the pace of change is so rapid, businesses generally have a culture of 
continuous learning for all their employees. The choice of training to be 
undertaken may be management or employee driven.  
Performance 
reviews or 
appraisal 
Performance reviews are part of most big business operations and are normally 
linked to a target setting and an annual review process. This is where an employee 
usually has a meeting with his/her line manager to discuss the employee’s 
performance over the last year. Based on this review, targets are set for the future 
and training organised. This may be in the form of remedial or refresher training 
where poor performance has been identified. Better performance may lead to 
development training, so that the employee will be able to take on new or more 
senior roles within the business in the future. 
Choice of training method 
There are many factors that will affect the method or methods of training that a business will use. These 
include the type of job, for example, airline pilots would not start learning using on the job training, but 
would need significant off the job training before actually being allowed to fly a plane! 
Other factors a business would need to consider in their choice of training would be the firm’s budget 
and time available, whether the business has the capability of delivering its own training, for example 
trainers, rooms and equipment. Most importantly a firm would need to review carefully the needs of 
the workers who need to be trained and put in place the most appropriate training package that suits 
them!  
Benefits of training and development 
Effective training and development has the potential to provide a range of benefits for a business: 
 Higher quality – workers know how to do the job and will make less mistakes 
 Better levels of customer service are provided to customers – knowledge and skills of employees 
will be increased 
 Increased productivity – employees will know the best way of doing their work, increasing their 
overall efficiency 
 Improved motivation -  workers feel valued, so will work better and harder 
 Less supervision is required, as workers are more motivated and loyal to the business 
 More flexibility through better and new skills, which also allows use of new technology 
 Easier to recruit and employee retention will be higher – staff are happy and want to work for a 
business that cares; this reduces recruitment and selection costs which can be high and a very 
time consuming process 
 Easier to implement change in the business 
 


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 140  
It should be noted that training also benefits the employee. In some cases this will be the same benefit 
as for the business, but not always. A well trained worker may be able to be promoted internally in a 
business to a higher position in the organisational structure or gain a better job at another business. 
Retraining to use new technology 
As new technology is introduced into a business then employees will need training on how to use it. It is 
generally cheaper to retain and retrain existing staff rather than replace them with new employees. As 
well as management directing employees to training for new technology, their training needs can also 
be identified as part of the appraisal or performance review process.  
Methods of training for new technology can include formal training provided by the supplier of the new 
technology. This is quite common for new ICT packages and equipment. There can also be cascade type 
methods, where one employee is sent on a training course and then trains colleagues on their return. 
All training will cost money, this might be a direct charge for a course or the cost might be included in 
the purchase of the new technology equipment. There can also be indirect costs such as covering for 
employee’s who are absent from work because they are being trained. 
The benefits of the training are normally significant. By introducing new technology, there may be the 
need for less employees, but it is important that all employees are able to use new technology 
efficiently. Well trained staff will also ensure that quality is maintained or improved and this can lead to 
products that are cheaper to produce and more competitively priced, as well as being of good quality.  
Motivation 
Having recruited the right workforce, a business needs to make sure they continue to work at the 
highest possible standards for as long as possible. There are many ways of motivating a workforce so 
that this happens. The success of the methods will depend on the type of the business and the 
circumstances in which it is operating. 
What is motivation? 
Motivation is essentially about the commitment to doing something.  In the context of a business, 
motivation can be said to relate to:  
“the will to work” 
However, motivation is about more than simply working hard or completing tasks. People in business 
can find motivation from a variety of sources. 
Motivation can come from the enjoyment of the work itself and/or from the desire to achieve certain 
goals, for example earn more money or achieve promotion. It can also come from the sense of 
satisfaction gained from completing a specific problem or achieving a successful outcome after a 
difficult project. 
Motivation is important as people’s behaviour is determined by what motivates them. The performance 
of employees is a product of both their abilities, for example their skills and experience, and their 
motivation levels.  A talented employee who feels de-motivated is unlikely to perform well at work, but 
a motivated employee can often deliver far more than is expected from them! 
Benefits of a well-motivated workforce 
A well-motivated workforce can provide several advantages to a business: 


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 141  
 High productivity (amount produced per employee).  This can lead to lower average unit costs of 
production, as the firm’s fixed costs will be spread across more units, and enables a firm to sell 
its products at a lower price or benefit from receiving higher profit margins on each item sold 
 Low levels of absenteeism as the employees are content with their working lives and will 
therefore motivate themselves to attend work, even if they feel “under the weather!” 
 High levels of staff retention and low levels of staff turnover (the number of employees leaving 
the business).  This can lead to lower training and recruitment costs 
 Improved industrial relations with trade unions. The relationship between staff and 
management is strong 
 Contented workers give the firm a good reputation as an employer, therefore making it easier to 
recruit the best workers in the future 
 Motivated employees are likely to improve product quality or the customer service associated 
with a product, as they want to do the best job that they can, as they really care about the 
quality of their work 
Financial methods of motivation 
There are many reasons why people work for a living, although money or other financial rewards play a 
key role in motivating people in the workplace. 
There are a wide variety of ways in which a business can offer money, or financial rewards, as part of 
the pay package. In many cases, an employee may benefit from a mixture of these financial rewards 
which can include: 
• Salaries: fixed amounts paid each month for performing a role; these are common for most 
managerial positions, for example an accountant, teacher 
• Wage: pay based on time worked; very common in small businesses or in retail stores where 
employees are paid by the hour 
• Piece-rate pay: pay per item produced, for example used in fruit picking 
• Commission: payment based on the value of sales achieved. This can sometimes be as a 
percentage of sales. 
• Bonus: extra pay or reward for reaching a target; can be for an individual, a team or a workforce 
• Profit share: staff payments or bonuses are linked to the performance of the firm, may include 
shares for the employees.   
• Promotion: if an employee does well they will get promoted which will give them a higher salary 
• Fringe benefits are benefits in kind that are not paid out directly in cash (or cash equivalents 
such as shares). Examples of these include: company cars, travel and housing subsidies, holidays, 
childcare provision, staff uniforms and staff discounts. The type of fringe benefits that are given 
to employees would be appropriate to the size, nature and finances available within the firm. 
Non-financial methods of motivation 
An entrepreneur or small business owner is in a good position to be able to motivate his/her staff.  The 
business owner is likely to know personally each member of staff and have a close understanding of 
their skills, abilities and attitude at work.  
Larger businesses will use similar methods providing they know their employees and have an 
organisational structure that provides opportunities for non-financial motivation to take place.  
Here are some non-financial ways in which business can keep staff motivated: 


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 142  
• Job enlargement – give staff a greater variety of tasks to perform (not necessarily more 
challenging) which should make the work more interesting.  This often happens anyway in small 
businesses where staff undertake a variety of tasks. This might take place through job rotation, 
which also means staff can undertake more than one job. 
• Job enrichment – this involves workers being given greater responsibility and a wider range of 
more complex and challenging tasks. This should give a greater sense of achievement.  
• Autonomy – employees are given more independence so that they are trusted to work on their 
own and use their own initiative. 


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 143  
Glossary 
 
Term Definition 
Adding value How a business sells a product for more than it costs through the processes 
they apply 
Advertising Promotional method where a business pays to place an advert in a form of 
media, such as a newspaper or television 
Aesthetics The attractiveness of the design of a product 
Aims and objectives The overall goals of a business or organisation identifying what the business is 
trying to achieve 
Application form A method of applying for a job where the required details are decided by the 
business who is recruiting 
Autonomy The independence a worker has within their job 
Average rate of 
return 
The annual percentage profit that an investment makes compared to the cost of 
the investment 
Bar gate stock 
control graph 
A method of displaying data on stock levels, which allows stock control policy to 
be decided, implemented and reviewed within a business 
Batch production Method of production where groups or types of products are made at several 
stages 
Bonus An extra amount of financial pay received through achieving a business target  
Branding What distinguishes a good or service from rivals 
Break even Where total revenue is the same as total costs and no profit or loss is made 
Buffer stock A quantity of stock kept in store to safeguard against unforeseen shortages or 
demands 
Business An organisation set up to meet customer demand and to make a profit for its 
owners 
Business 
environment 
The external factors such as the economy and the law that influence how a 
business operates 
Business plan A document produced by a new or existing business that shows what its 
objectives are and how it will meet them 
Capacity The maximum production output a business can achieve with its existing 
resources 
Capital The initial money that is needed to start a business that is normally linked to 
purchases of machinery and premises 
Cash-flow The money that flows into and out of a business 
Cash-flow forecast The prediction of how much money will come into and out of a business over a 
future time period 
Cash inflow The money that comes into a business from sales and other sources 
Cash outflow The money leaving a business that it spends on raw materials, labour and other 
expenses 
Centralised Where business decision making and implementation take place at and from 


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 144  
Term Definition 
the business headquarters 
Chain of command Part of the structure of a business organisation which shows who is in charge of 
who 
Closing balance The total cash-flow left at the end of a period 
Commission The extra amount of pay workers receive as a percentage of their or the 
business’s sales 
Communication How messages are passed within a business or from a business to its customers 
Competition Other businesses that produce the same or similar goods or services 
Competitive 
advantage 
A business has a marketing mix which enables it to be more successful than its 
competitors 
Competitive 
environment 
The number and strength of other businesses in the same market 
Competitive pricing Where the price of a product is decided by comparing it to its rivals 
Consumer The person or business that use the good or service produced 
Consumer income How much money consumers have to spend on their needs and wants 
Consumer law Legal constraints that protect the consumer from unfair business practice 
Consumer Rights Where consumers are protected by laws in terms of product quality, returning 
goods, repairs and replacements, digital content and delivery 
Consumer spending The level of spending that consumers undertake related to their income 
Cost plus A pricing method where a business decides what price to charge based only on 
the cost of its production and some extra to make a profit 
Crowd funding Finance raised through internet appeals from a large number of small investors 
Curriculum Vitae A document summarising the personal details, qualifications and experiences of 
an individual. Often used to apply for a job 
Customer 
engagement 
Communicating with customers in a positive way 
Customer feedback Enquiries made after a sale to show how a good, a service or the sales process 
could be improved 
Customer loyalty Whether customers return to a  business on a regular basis to purchase more of 
the same goods or other goods that they produce 
Customer needs What an individual must have in order to survive 
Customer satisfaction How happy the consumer is with the product or service they have purchased 
Customer service How a business looks after its customers before, during and after they make a 
purchase 
Customers The people who purchase a product or service from a business (not always the 
consumer) 
Decentralised A business structure and its decision-making is spread out to include more 
junior managers as well as individual business units or locations 
Delayering A method of saving costs in an organisation by reducing the number of layers 
Demographics Factors related to population, often used as a basis for segmentation 


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 145  
Term Definition 
Design mix The use, appearance and cost of a product 
Differentiation When a business makes its product different to those of its competitors 
Digital 
communication 
Sending messages using mobile or internet technology 
Digital technology Where businesses use computers in any way to improve their business 
performance 
Directors People appointed by the shareholders to run the company on a day-to-day basis 
to make all the important decisions 
Discrimination When an employer choses its workers based on a particular characteristic; many 
of these are illegal, for example age, gender and race 
Distribution How a product gets from the producer to the consumer 
Dividend The share of the profit received by a shareholder 
E-commerce Using the internet to promote and sell a good or service 
Economic climate How a business is affected by economic variables such as interest rates or 
inflation in a country or in other countries 
Efficiency Measures of how much output is being produced per unit of input 
Employees People who work within a business 
Employment law Legal constraints that protect the employees of a business from unfair business 
practice  
Employment level The % employment rate in a country which will effect consumer spending and 
the availability of employees 
E-newsletter A regular publication sent electronically to customers with items of interest, 
new products and promotions; used to maintain regular contact with customers 
Enterprise A business that has the objective of making a profit 
Entrepreneur An individual who takes a calculated risk in starting or running a business in 
return for making a profit 
Environmental 
considerations 
The business takes into account consumer and producer concerns about the 
environment 
E-tailer An electronic retailer i.e. sells goods using the internet 
Ethical objectives Where businesses have as an aim what is morally right rather than necessarily 
the most profitable option 
Excessive 
communication 
When too much communication can lead to workers being ineffective or 
inefficient because of unnecessary work acknowledging and responding to 
communications 
Exchange rate The amount of foreign currency that can be purchased with another currency 
Exports Goods or services that are produced in this country and sold to other countries 
Extension strategy Methods of prolonging the product life cycle to extend the life of a product 
External finance Sources of money from outside of a business 
External growth Growth which occurs by a merging with or taking over another business 
External influence Factors that affect a business but they cannot control 


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 146  
Term Definition 
External recruitment Where a business aims to finds new workers from outside of its current 
workforce 
Finance The money that is necessary to start and run a business  
Financial data Information on the costs and revenues of businesses showing changes over time 
and used as the basis for calculations and displaying to managers 
Financial objectives Quantifiable targets for a business including profit, sales and costs 
Fixed costs Business costs that do not vary with output 
Fixed premises Where business premises are located in a building; the use has decreased with 
the rise of the  internet increasing home or teleworking 
Flat structure Where the organisational structure has few layers, short chains of command 
and wide spans of control 
Flexible hours Either the employee or the employer have some choice about the actual hours 
worked 
Flow production Method of production associated with making very large quantities of standard 
products 
Focus group In depth market research where discussions take place with a group of potential 
of actual consumers 
Formal training Specialist training for employees involving courses or off site provision 
Franchise Where a business acquires the right to use the name and products of another 
business 
Franchisee The business which runs a franchise in a specific territory or area 
Franchisor The seller of a right to operate a franchise 
Freelance contracts Where an employee is available to be hired on a daily basis or just for a specific 
job 
Fringe benefit Methods of rewarding a worker that are not directly monetary 
Full time working An employee who is employed for a whole weeks work 
Function  A feature of product design which shows that the product can perform its 
intended job 
Gap in the market An opportunity for a business to provide a good or service that is not currently 
available 
Globalisation The increased integration of trade, finance and communications between 
countries 
Goods Products that businesses produce that have a physical presence 
Gross profit The difference between revenue and cost of sales; calculated as:  
gross profit = total revenue – cost of sales 
Gross profit margin The percentage profit made on sales not taking into account the businesses 
expenses; calculated as: gross profit/sales revenue x 100 
Growth A business objective of increasing the amount or value of sales 
Health and safety law Legal constraints that protect the employees of a business from unsafe  
business practice 


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 147  
Term Definition 
Hierarchical structure Where the of organisational structure has many layers, long chains of command 
and narrow spans of control 
Human resources How a business recruits and manages its workforce 
Imports Goods or services that are produced in other countries and consumed in this 
country 
Inflation Where costs and prices in an economy are increasing  
Informal training Where employees learn how to do a job at the workplace by observing other 
employees 
Innovation The introduction of a new product or features on a product 
Inorganic growth Growth which occurs by merging with or taking over another business 
Insolvency Where a business runs out of cash and is not able to obtain new finance 
Interest rates The percentage cost of borrowing money or the reward for saving money 
Internal finance Where a business obtains funds from its own sources such as retained profits 
Internal growth Organic growth which takes place through a business selling more of its own 
products 
Internal recruitment Where a business aims to finds new workers from within its current workforce 
Internet A means of connecting computer to computer to allow the transfer of 
information around the world 
Investment The purchase of new premises or machinery which can be used for growth, 
replacement or mechanisation 
Job analysis A business deciding whether it needs a worker and what type if required 
Job description An explanation of the roles and responsibilities of a job 
Job enrichment Giving  workers more responsibility or more complex and challenging tasks so 
they have a sense of achievement 
Job production Method of production where products are made individually 
Job roles What the different types of jobs do in a business 
Job rotation Where a worker moves from one job to another job over a period of time 
Just-in-time Where inputs into the production process arrive on the production line just as 
they are needed 
Labour The workers who are needed directly or indirectly to provide the good or 
service that a business produces 
Lead time The time between ordering a good or service and receiving it 
Legal structure What type of organisation a business chooses to be such as a partnership or 
company 
Limited liability The protection enjoyed by shareholders who can only lose the money they have 
put into the company 
Loan Source of finance for a business where they receive a fixed amount of money 
for a specified time, which will need repayment with interest 
Loan capital Sources of finance involving loans normally from banks or other financial 


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 148  
Term Definition 
institutions 
Local community A business stakeholder who will be affected by a business’s location in terms of 
direct and indirect employment opportunities  
Location The place where a firm decides to conduct its business 
Logistics The management of the flow of goods, information and money along the supply 
chain 
Loss Where the costs of a business are greater than its income 
Loss leader Where a business prices a good at less than its cost to encourage customers to 
buy other goods at the same time 
Management  How to successfully ensure that employees work effectively 
Margin of safety The additional output that a business produces or expects to produce more 
than its breakeven output 
Market conditions The current situation in the economy and whether it is improving or worsening 
Market data Quantitative information such as sales figures over time for the market of a 
product or service 
Market map A diagram representing different businesses in a market that are compared to 
two variables, such as price and quality; it is used to identify a gap in the market 
Market research Information from existing and potential consumers about their reaction to a 
good or service 
Market share The percentage of total sales a firm’s particular good or service has 
Marketing Providing the goods and services that consumers require whilst making a profit 
Marketing mix The ingredients needed to produce a marketing policy normally known as the 
4Ps (product, price, place and promotion) 
Market segments A way of dividing up the market into different groups of potential customers 
Materials The inputs needed for the production of a good or service 
Merger Where two businesses of equal size are joined together 
Motivation The desire of an employee to do a job well 
Multinational A business that produces goods in more than one country 
Needs What an individual must have in order to survive 
Net cash-flow The difference between the cash inflows and cash outflows for a business in a 
time period 
Net profit The total amount of money made from the trading activities of the business; 
calculated as: net profit = gross profit - overheads/expenses 
Net profit margin The percentage profit made after all costs and expenses have been deducted; 
calculated as: net profit/sales revenue x 100 
Non-financial 
objectives 
Business targets that involve areas such as improving quality and being more 
ethical 
Observation A method of market research where direct data is gathered from customer 
actions 
Obsolete When a type of product is no longer produced because it is not needed or has 


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 149  
Term Definition 
been replaced 
Opening balance The total cash-flow available at the start of a period 
Operational staff Employees who directly do the work such as the manufacturing or providing the 
service 
Organic growth Growth which occurs as a business sells more of its own products 
Organisational 
structure 
The way employees are arranged into a formal structure for control and 
communication 
Output The total quantity produced by a business, employee or machine over a given 
period of time 
Overdraft Source of finance for a business where it is allowed to take more money out of 
its account than it has deposited 
Overheads Costs or expenses that a business incurs 
Partnership Where a business is started and owned by more than one person, who then 
share the profits and the responsibilities 
Part-time working Where an employee is employed for less than a whole weeks work 
Payment system The use of digital technology by a business to pay its suppliers and employees 
Performance review A process of staff development looking back at how well an employee is doing 
their job; often linked to identifying future training needs and bonuses 
Permanent contract A job where an employee will continue working for an indefinite period 
Person specification The qualifications, skills, experience and personal attributes needed for a job 
Personal savings The difference between an individual’s income and their spending 
Place How a product or service is distributed to the customer 
Post sales service Following up with a customer after they have made a purchase to check that 
everything is “ok” 
Pressure group A collection of individuals who have a common cause and campaign to achieve 
it 
Price The amount of money a customer would need in order to buy a good or service  
Pricing strategy A policy that a business decides to calculate the price at which it chooses to sell 
its new or existing products 
Primary research First-hand information gathered by a business about existing and potential 
consumers 
Private limited 
company 
The most common kind of limited company in the UK, where shares can only be 
sold to “family and friends” 
Procurement The process of choosing a supplier 
Product life cycle The stages in the life of a product from when it is first thought of until it is finally 
removed from the market 
Product range The amount of different types of goods or services that a business chooses to 
produce 
Product trial A free or reduced price product given as a sample with the hope that consumers 
will continue to buy the product in the future 


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 150  
Term Definition 
Production The process which involves taking inputs and transforming them into outputs 
Productivity The amount of output per unit of input (labour, equipment, and capital) 
Profit The difference between costs and revenue 
Promotion Methods of making a consumer aware of a product and persuading them to buy 
it, includes advertising, sales promotion and public relations 
Promotion (human 
resources) 
Where an employee moves job to a more senior position 
Public limited 
company 
The kind of limited company whose shares can be bought on a recognised stock 
exchange 
Public relations An approach to promoting a business focussed on producing a positive image 
using media and other indirect methods 
Qualitative data Results of research that is based on opinions, attitudes and beliefs  
Quality Where a product is of a standard that meets a customer's requirements 
Quality assurance Setting up processes in production to ensure that quality is achieved 
Quality control Checking that the products produced by a business are of the required standard 
at the end of the production process 
Quantitative data Results of market research that is normally numerical  
Questionnaire A method of gaining market research data through asking the opinions of actual 
or potential customers 
Raw materials The inputs needed for the production of a good or service 
Recruitment A process a business undertakes to attract new or replacement workers 
Reliability Whether a supplier will always deliver at the agreed time 
Remote working Where employees can be working normally at home away from their business’s 
location being linked through the internet 
Remuneration The package of pay and other rewards provided to an employee 
Research and 
development 
Costs that are required in getting a new product ready to launch into a market  
Retailer The final part of the distribution process where the product is sold to the 
customer 
Retained profit A source of finance based on money that a business keeps back after paying 
shareholders a dividend and giving owners their share of the profits 
Retention How well a business keeps the staff that it employs 
Revenue The income from sales; price x quantity sold 
Reward What an entrepreneur receives, financial or non-financial, as the return for the 
risks that are taken 
Risk The possibility that a business may not be successful 
Roles and 
responsibilities 
The details about a job and what it involves 
Sales process A series of activities that are designed to engage customers and to complete a 
sale 


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 151  
Term Definition 
Sales promotion Point of sale methods that persuade customers to buy a product  
Secondary research Information that has already been collected by other businesses or 
organisations about existing and potential consumers 
Segmentation A way of dividing up the market into different groups of potential customers 
Self-learning A method of training and development where the employee works through a 
guided programme of information and activities 
Selling assets When a business sells its land, buildings, machinery or equipment that are no 
longer needed to raise additional finance 
Service Activities that are provided by a business for customers and that are not 
tangible 
Share capital The money raised by a business from the sale of shares 
Share issue When a company raises finance through selling shares to new or existing 
shareholders 
Shareholder An owner of a company who receives a dividend as a return for their investment 
Shares When an investor owns part of a private or public limited company 
Social media Internet sites such as Facebook and Twitter that allow individuals to interact 
through messages and updating 
Social objectives Business objectives such as being ethical or environmentally friendly 
Sole trader Where a business is started and owned by one person who keeps all the profits, 
but holds all the responsibilities 
Sources of finance Options that a business has if it needs additional finance to start, run or expand 
its business 
Span of control The number of employees who a manager directly controls 
Special offers Temporary deals to encourage customers to try a new product or a relaunched 
product 
Sponsorship A type of public relations where a business aims to improve brand awareness 
through making donations to individuals and organisations 
Stakeholder An individual or group that is directly or indirectly affected by the actions of a 
business 
Stock market 
flotation 
When a company raises finance through selling shares to new or existing 
shareholders 
Supervisor An employee with responsibilities for the work produced by a number of 
workers 
Supplier A business that provides raw materials, components, finished goods or services 
in exchange for payment 
Supply chain All activities that are involved in getting a good or service to the customer 
Support staff Employees who are called onto assist in any area of the organisation by 
providing additional labour or specialist skills 
Survey A method of market research where customers and potential customers are 
asked their opinions 


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 152  
Term Definition 
Survival A business objective where continuing in existence becomes the short term goal 
Sustainability To ensure that production in an economy can continue at the same level in the 
future 
Takeover Where a business acquires another business 
Target market Where customers are segmented to allow businesses to focus its marketing 
policy on meeting their specific requirements 
Target setting An employee process linked to performance reviews that sets goals and 
identifies training needs 
Tariff A tax on imports that increases their price and allows home businesses an 
advantage 
Taxation How the government collects money to fund its expenditure programme and 
influence the economy 
Team leader An employee with responsibilities for the work produced by a group of workers 
Technology How businesses uses machines and devices to improve their operation 
Temporary contract A job where a worker will be employed for a fixed period of time 
Total costs All the costs of a business; calculated as:  
total costs = fixed costs + variable costs 
Trade bloc A group of countries that have free trade within their group and that may 
restrict imports from countries outside of the trade bloc 
Trade credit When a business orders and receives supplies, but pays for them at a later date 
Training How employees learn to do a job 
Unemployment Where people are able, available and willing to work at the going wage but 
cannot find a job 
Unique selling point What makes a business’s goods or services different from its competitors 
Unit costs The average cost of making one unit or item 
Unlimited liability If a business becomes  bankrupt, sole traders and partners are personally liable 
for their business’s debts 
Variable costs Business costs that change with output, such as raw materials 
Venture capital A source of finance normally for small businesses with good growth prospects, 
where the venture capitalist normally takes a stake in the business 
Viral advertising Where an advert is spread through social media by people spreading the 
message through forwarding to their friends and contacts 
Wants What an individual would like, but does not need to survive 
 