1.1 Enterprise and entrepreneurship 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which an 
enterprise and an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business 
environment and how this might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this sections 
relationship with the other areas in this theme and how these areas may impact on business decision-
making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
The dynamic nature of 
business 
New business ideas and their sources 
Adapting existing ideas 
Changes in technology  
Changes in customer requirements 
Risk and reward Types and impact of business risks 
Types and impact of business rewards 
The role of business 
enterprise 
The role of enterprise in business activity 
Production of goods and services 
Meeting customer needs 
Adding value  
The role of the entrepreneur 
 
Dynamic nature of business 
Where do business ideas come from?  In practice, there are many ways in which a business opportunity 
and idea is first spotted.   
Firstly, the world in which we live in is always rapidly changing and therefore businesses are constantly 
faced with change. These changes include new legislation, changes in the economy, new technology, 
which may result in some goods and services becoming obsolete, political events and even the weather. 
Consumer tastes will change as new fashions arise and as new ideas and developments come along. 
Successful businesses will come up with new ideas, adapt existing products and change their location 
and their staff as different circumstances arise.  Change is a massive opportunity! However, it is also a 
considerable threat to those businesses that ignore the changes that are taking place in the market. 
Businesses should avoid standing still, as those that try to will generally end up failing! 
Some of the key changes that give rise to new ideas are summarised below:  
  


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 4  
 
Type of change: Explanation: 
New technology 
 
Ideas for new products might come about due to advances in technology. 
Computers, smartphones, digital cameras and so on, are all examples of 
products where new technology is constantly allowing new products to be 
developed and launched for sale. 
Change in consumer 
wants 
 
Fashions and consumer tastes are always changing. As well as the more 
obvious areas of clothing, designs will also change in areas such as cars, 
furniture, buildings and many more consumer goods. There are also new 
trends in terms of healthy eating, fitness and specialist types of holidays. 
Products and services 
becoming obsolete 
Over time products become outdated as new products are developed, which 
is often linked to changes in technology. Other reasons for products 
becoming obsolete are changes in the economy, for example increased 
wealth will decrease demand for inferior products, such as supermarket 
value products and bus travel. 
Original ideas 
One of the key characteristics of many entrepreneurs is their creativity. Entrepreneurs will often 
produce many original ideas for new goods and services. In many cases, these will not prove practical or 
profitable to develop on a larger scale and take to market! Some ideas however, will be worth pursuing. 
At this point, the entrepreneur will undertake research and development of the idea. 
Adapting existing products 
Many new products are developed from existing goods or services, whereby the entrepreneur thinks of 
a way of improving them. Consider any technology based product, such as the computer or the mobile 
phone, and it is clear how much and how quickly the product has been adapted and developed in recent 
years. 
Business experience 
Many ideas for successful businesses come from people who have experience of working in a particular 
market or industry.  For a start-up business, there are several advantages of applying this experience to 
a new business idea: 
 Better and more detailed understanding of what customers want 
 Knowledge of competitors, pricing, suppliers etc. 
 Less need for start-up market research 
 Entrepreneur is able to make more realistic assumptions in the business plan about sales, costs 
etc. 
 The entrepreneur may have contacts in the industry, who might then become the first 
customers of the start-up! 


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 5  
All of the above help the business planning process and it can be argued that they reduce the risk of 
starting up a business.  
On the other hand, it can be argued that “familiarity breeds contempt”.  In other words, detailed 
experience of an industry means that the budding entrepreneur does not have a fresh view.  Someone 
who is new to a market may be able to exploit approaches that have worked in other industries, to 
make an impact with their idea. 
Personal experience 
Many ideas come to entrepreneurs from their day-to-day dealings in life or from their hobbies and 
interests. 
For some of us, frustrating or bad experiences are a source of irritation.  For the entrepreneur, they 
might suggest a business opportunity.   
It is often said that one of the best ways to spot a business opportunity is to look for examples of poor 
customer service (complaints, product returns, persistent queues etc).  Such examples suggest that 
there is an opportunity to do something better, quicker or cheaper than the existing offer! 
Hobbies and interests are also a rich source of business ideas, although an entrepreneur would have to 
be careful to avoid assuming that, just because they may have a passion for collecting “rare can 
openers”, there is a ready market from people with similar interests!  Many people have tried to turn 
their hobby into a business and found that it generates only a small contribution to household income 
and therefore it would not prove to be a sustainable future business for the entrepreneur. 
Observation 
Simply observing what happens on a day to day basis can be a good way of spotting an idea.  Often an 
idea will be launched in another country that has not yet been tried in other similar economies.  For 
example, successful entrepreneur Stephen Waring, fortunately attended a wedding in the USA and by 
luck sat next to someone who ran a household service business, treating lawns.  After some brief 
market research, Stephen found out that there was no similar business in the UK, so he launched one in 
1986.  Green Thumb has since become a hugely successful franchise business providing lawn care and 
grass maintenance for nearly 500,000 houses in the UK.  
It is worth looking at other examples of successful business start-ups, in order to appreciate the wide 
and diverse range of sources of ideas that these firms are built upon.  Here are some good ones: 
Business Entrepreneur Where the Idea Came From 
Propercorn Casa Stavrou 
and Ryan Kohn 
Casa, recognised that consumers tastes were changing.  Consumers 
were looking for healthier alternatives to their favourite snack 
foods. Demand for organic, low sugar, low fat snacks, crisps and 
biscuits was rising.   With the help of her best friend, Ryan, they 
decided to create a snack that they felt was satisfying, delicious and 
healthy.  Propercorn, was born and is now sold in 11 countries and 
stocked in major supermarkets 
King of Shaves Will King Will found traditional wet-shaving painful, due to his sensitive skin.  
His girlfriend suggested using oil to smooth the process.  An oil-
based solution to shaving was developed and is now a world leader. 


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 6  
Mallzee Cally Russell Cally was frustrated with the process of shopping online for clothes.  
He felt it was time consuming having to visit different sites to 
source his favourite brands.  He create an app – Mallzee. The 
personalised shopping app allows shoppers to access their 
favourite stores within one app, making it simpler and easier to buy 
clothes online. 
Superjam Fraser Doherty Fraser turned his grandmother’s recipe for sugar-free jams into a 
best-selling grocery brand. 
What makes a good business idea? 
Having an idea for a business is the easy bit! It is much harder to work out whether the idea has 
potential and can be turned into a viable business idea. 
Good business ideas therefore, tend to have one or more of the following characteristics: 
 They solve a problem 
 Offer a cheaper or better way of doing something than existing goods or services 
 Are simple and practicable 
 Can be developed and delivered to the market quickly 
 Have a clear focus on meeting the needs of the target customer 
 Anticipate market trends and exploit growth opportunities 
 
Risk and reward 
Risk can mean several things: 
• the chance of loss or damage 
• the probability that something goes wrong, leading to a loss 
• when a hoped-for outcome does not happen 
If setting up a new business was risk-free i.e. guaranteed to succeed, then we would all do it! The bad 
news for entrepreneurs is that investing in a start-up business is highly risky. 
What is the risk?  The main risk is that the business will fail and that the entrepreneur will lose his/her 
investment.  In the case of a sole trader or partnership, the entrepreneur may also end up personally 
liable for the debts of the failed business (an important reason why many start-ups select private 
limited companies as their chosen form of business organisation).  
Prior to complete failure, the business may also struggle for customers and to generate sufficient 
revenue to cover costs initially or on an ongoing basis. This may leave the entrepreneur with a lack of 
security – will he/she have enough funds to continue to trade successfully in the future, without being 
reliant on other sources of finance to keep the firm going? Will the entrepreneur have enough money to 
pay themselves a decent wage, to maintain his/her desired standard of living? 
Another risk is that a failed business may leave the entrepreneur struggling to finance another business 
or successfully be appointed for a job in someone else’s firm. This may be the result of the entrepreneur 
finding it difficult to face and accept the overall failure itself.  There is no reason why people should be 
ashamed of failing in business, but in reality many are. 


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 7  
Taken together, it can be seen why these risks are often the reason why an entrepreneur continues to 
keep a business going, even when the business is struggling badly. When you are “risking it all” then you 
put all your effort into making the business a success! 
Learning the lessons of failure 
A good way of thinking about the risks being taken, is to consider why start-up and small businesses fail.  
If an entrepreneur can learn from and avoid these mistakes, then any new business that is set up has a 
greater chance of survival and success. 
Here are the main reasons why businesses fail: 
Poor management Plain and simple. Planning is inadequate leading to poor decision-making, costs 
are not kept under control, business owners or management do not understand 
their market and customers well enough and/or a poor quality product is provided 
Poor market 
research 
In starting a business or keeping an existing business successful, there is a need to 
undertake market research. This will need to be reliable enough to predict future 
sales. It is often not carried out as it is too expensive or, if it is completed, the data 
is frequently out of date or not fully relevant 
Sales lower than 
expected 
It is very easy to over-estimate the sales that will be achieved by a start-up.  The 
business plan can be over-optimistic about the price that customers will accept 
and the volumes they will buy 
Start-up costs too 
high 
Another common weakness of start-up business planning.  Sometimes costs are 
simply missed out altogether or alternatively the amounts are under-estimated.  
This is a big concern at the start-up stage, where finance is limited. A delayed 
product launch or store opening may be the cause of start-up costs being higher 
than expected 
Unexpected 
shocks 
These can come in various forms, for example flash floods that hit different places 
in the UK from time to time, a new competitor entering the market, a global 
recession, a change in government and the UK leaving the EU (BREXIT) 
Too reliant on a 
small number of 
customers 
A start-up that is too reliant on one or a few customers is at greater risk of failure 
than one which has a broader, more diverse customer base.  If the customer 
relationship breaks down and/or the customer stops buying products from the 
business, then it puts the business at risk  
Poor quality This is linked to poor management.  Persistent poor quality goods or services will 
ultimately kill a business, as rival businesses will produce superior products that 
customers will undoubtedly prefer 
By identifying the cause of failure, this allows a business owner to come up with solutions. Better still it 
allows a business to improve its planning, so that in the future it can minimise its risk and prevent it 
happening again – if it is not too late! 
Reducing risk 
There are many ways of reducing risk in a new or small business. Some of the key ones are as follows: 
• Plan – for example prepare a realistic business plan 
• Research – market research should be valid, up to date and specific to the business’s needs 
• Be cautious –  the business should avoid growing too fast 


===== PDF PAGE 9 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 8  
• Finance with care  – shares and retained profits are safer than loans, as these sources of finance 
do not need to be paid back 
• Avoid costs – premises and staff are expensive 
• Protect – a company with limited liability will protect investors 
• Monitor and review – look back and look forward, ensure the business is on track to where it 
should be; this can be achieved by monitoring finances and reviewing regularly the aims and the 
objectives of the business to assess progress 
Rewards from enterprise 
As well as risks, there are also many rewards for being in business. For some entrepreneurs, many of 
these arise from achieving their own personal objectives. These include:   
• a personal sense of satisfaction of opening and running a successful business 
• building something from scratch i.e. their own enterprise 
• being in full control and therefore having the independence and ability to make all the decisions 
• making that first sale! 
• opening in a new location 
• employing more people 
• getting an industry award or receiving some good publicity 
• getting great feedback from customers 
• having social objectives for society as a whole e.g. helping others and attempting to meet a 
social need  
These are the kind of non-financial rewards that give entrepreneurs a “buzz”. 
However, ultimately, it is the financial rewards of making profit that justify the effort and make taking 
the risk worthwhile. Famous entrepreneurs, such as Sir Richard Branson (Virgin), Sir Alan Sugar 
(Amstrad), James Dyson and  Charles Dunstone (Carphone Warehouse), have all built very successful 
businesses that are either worth or have been sold for millions of pounds.  
Sarah Willingham, who has appeared as one of the “Dragons” on Dragons Den, is another example of a 
successful entrepreneur. Sarah worked in the restaurant industry from the age of 13 and has now 
managed some of the world’s most successful restaurants, including launching Pizza Express in Asia and 
Planet Hollywood in Paris.  
In 2004, she saw the opportunity to turn a failing chain of six Indian restaurants into a successful 
investment. Sarah raised enough finance to buy “The Bombay Bicycle Club” which she sold three years 
later for well over a million pounds, having made it into the largest and most successful Indian 
restaurant chain in the UK. 
There is a strong tradition of entrepreneurs who have built and sold one business for a substantial 
amount of money, to go on to build other successful businesses.  They never lose the entrepreneurial 
buzz! 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 10 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 9  
Role of Business Enterprise 
The term “enterprise” has two common meanings. 
Firstly, an enterprise is simply another name for a business.  You will often come across the use of the 
word when reading about start-ups and other businesses…“Richard Branson’s enterprise” or “Julie set 
up her successful enterprise after leaving teaching”. 
Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the word enterprise describes the actions of someone who 
takes a risk by setting up, investing in and running a business.   
Someone who shows enterprise by setting up a business is called an “entrepreneur”.   
Purposes of enterprise 
The role of the enterprise will normally revolve around making a profit for the entrepreneur. There are 
a variety of ways that the enterprise can achieve this: 
Purpose of 
enterprise activity 
Explanation 
Producing goods 
and services 
An entrepreneur will organise the business operation and bring together the 
resources that are required to ensure that goods or services are produced 
efficiently and will reach the customer so that a profit can be made 
Meeting customer 
needs 
An enterprise should sell goods or services that meet a specific customer need. 
If an enterprise just produces a product because the entrepreneur knows how to 
make it, without demand being present in the market, the business will end up 
with unsold stock 
Adding value In order to make a profit, the enterprise will need to sell at a price that is higher 
than its costs. This is known as value added and can be increased in different 
ways such as: 
 Convenience: customers may be prepared to pay more for a service at 
home rather than having to go to the shops 
 Branding: if an enterprise can establish itself as being a good quality or 
reliable brand, then the business can charge more 
 Design: the use, appearance and cost of a product are all important 
factors and can add value to its production 
 Quality: customers will have an expectation of the quality of a product 
and the more a product meets or exceeds this, the more value will be 
added in its production 
 Unique selling point (USP): if a product is different to that of its 
competitors in some good way, then the enterprise has the possibility of 
charging a higher price because of this difference. This might be the 
name of the product or a particular feature that it possesses 
  


===== PDF PAGE 11 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 10  
What is an entrepreneur? 
There are many definitions of what is meant by an entrepreneur, but they tend to say the same thing, 
which is that an entrepreneur is… 
“someone who takes a calculated risk through starting a business.” 
An entrepreneur is someone who is enterprising. In other words they: 
• take the initiative and can organise resources to try and exploit a business opportunity 
• take time to understand and calculate the risks involved 
• make an investment, often of their own money, to set up the business 
• go ahead, despite the risk that the business venture might fail 
• are capable of making accurate business decisions  
An entrepreneur will have many different reasons for starting a business and these will vary between 
different entrepreneurs: 
Financial 
objectives 
 
Making a profit – this is achieved through creating more revenue than the costs 
involved in running the business. Alternatively a profit could be made from selling 
the business or business idea to another business for a lot of money. 
Investing money – some entrepreneurs have a sum of money, which they have 
gained through redundancy or inheritance, and they want it to provide a return 
to them i.e. they would like to use the money to make more money in the future. 
Non-financial 
objectives 
 
Work-life balance – entrepreneurs can have more choice over what work they do 
and when they do it. They can often run their business from home, giving them 
more freedom and flexibility. 
 
Skills and interests – entrepreneurs often have business ideas that are linked to 
their own skills or interests. This can be very motivating for the entrepreneur, as 
they will have a genuine passion for the business idea and therefore will be highly 
motivated to make the business succeed. 
 
Being their own boss – many entrepreneurs want to be independent to make 
their own decisions and not be part of a large organisation. Their current job 
might also be boring, causing them to be unhappy with their existing situation. 
In recent years the media has glamourised the challenge of starting and growing a business.  A quick 
search on Amazon.co.uk will display many books by entrepreneurs and other “business experts” 
describing “how I made my first million” etc. Television shows, such as Dragons Den and The 
Apprentice, have proved hugely popular by showing the challenges faced in setting up a business or 
gaining investment for a business idea. Entrepreneurs such as Lord Sugar, Sir Richard Branson and Sir 
James Dyson have earned enormous fortunes and provide inspiration for the next generation of 
budding business leaders. 
It is important, however, to realise that starting a business is rarely glamourous.  In fact it is nearly 
always very hard work.  For every success story, there are almost certainly many more business failures 
or businesses that do not meet the expectations of the people who set them up. 
Not surprisingly, much research has been done to examine the personality and other characteristics of 
successful entrepreneurs, to see if there is a guaranteed method or route to success.  You will find many 


===== PDF PAGE 12 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 11  
lists of “what is takes to be an entrepreneur”, but they tend to cover the same points.  The following is a 
summary of the key findings: 
What makes a good entrepreneur? 
Successful entrepreneurs tend to have many of the following characteristics and skills: 
• Innovative – entrepreneurs have lots of ideas and are passionate about their product or 
service. 
• Risk-takers – they are prepared to take a calculated risk in order to maximise their rewards. 
• Hard working – they are prepared to work long hours, especially in the early stages of the 
business. 
• Organised – running a business can be very time consuming. They will know how to use their 
time, so that the business runs efficiently and effectively.  
• Determined – they are able to handle problems and overcome hurdles. Setting up a business 
is difficult, as well as time-consuming. 
• Persuasive – entrepreneurs are good at convincing other people and businesses about their 
idea, for example, persuading suppliers to supply their new business or convincing a 
potential employee to leave a current job and join the start-up, which could be seen as a 
very risky move. They are also good at persuading customers to buy their product or service. 
• Leadership – an entrepreneur must be able to lead his or her own business. They must be 
willing and able to effectively perform more than one role.  
• Lucky – every business needs some good luck e.g. being in the right place at the right time; 
however the more research, planning and preparation that goes into the business start-up, 
the more likely the business is to succeed.  
The important thing to remember about this list is that an entrepreneur is unlikely to possess all these 
characteristics!  Anyone who starts a business has strengths and weaknesses.  However, a successful 
entrepreneur would recognise where their weaknesses lie and take steps to address them, for example 
recruit someone with the right skills to support the entrepreneur in the business in this area. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 13 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 12
