1.4 - Making the Business Effective 
Topic overview 
In this topic students need to continue to relate the concepts to the contexts in which an enterprise and 
an entrepreneur will be operating. They must be aware of the local and national business environment 
and how this might impact on a small business. Students must be aware of this topic’s relationship with 
the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key things to learn 
The options for start-up and 
small businesses 
Limited and unlimited liability 
Business ownership: sole trader, partnership and private limited 
company 
Franchise operations 
Business location Factors effecting business location 
The marketing mix Definition of marketing mix 
Balancing the marketing mix 
Impact of change on the marketing mix 
Business plans Content of a business plan 
Purpose of a business plan 
 
Business organisation 
Before the different forms of legal structures of a sole trader, partnership and a private limited 
company are considered, the very important issues of “unlimited liability” and “limited liability” will be 
discussed. 
Unlimited liability 
There is a big risk when operating as a sole trader or a partnership. It occurs because, in the eyes of the 
law, there is no difference between the person running the business and the business itself.  When it 
comes to money owed by a business, the sole trader or partners have to use their own personal funds 
to pay these debts, if there is not enough money in the business to do so. The sole trader or the 
partners are, therefore, liable for any debts that the business incurs. This is called unlimited liability. 
As the sole trader or partners are personally responsible for any debts run up by the business, this 
means their homes or other assets owned by the entrepreneur(s) may be at risk if the business runs into 
trouble. This does happen and each year thousands of people become personally bankrupt, many of 
them through failed businesses. Some businesses have however, a lower risk of failure, where the 
owner avoids running up debts through buying and selling in cash, meaning there is no need to borrow 
large amounts of money. 
Limited liability 
Shareholders may be individuals or other companies. They are not responsible for the company's 
debts. Shareholders may only lose the money they have invested in the company if a business goes 
bankrupt, to help pay off any outstanding debts or liabilities. This means that the liability of 


===== PDF PAGE 46 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 45  
shareholders is limited to the value of their investment into the company’s shares.  This concept is 
called limited liability. 
It costs very little to set up a business as a private limited company and it can be set up very quickly. A 
summary of the benefits to the business of limited liability are: 
 Investors encouraged – the owner who normally owns shares, and all other investors who 
purchase shares, are protected in the way that they can only lose the money they have put into 
the business, not their personal possessions and property. This should encourage more people 
to invest in the business, as there is less risk. 
 Legal separation – a company has a separate legal identity to the business owners, unlike a sole 
trader or a partnership where the business is seen as the same as the owners in the eyes of the 
law. With limited liability any action against the business is taken against the company, not the 
owners 
Remember: LIMITED LIABILITY is only a benefit to private (and public) limited companies. Sole traders 
and partnerships do not benefit from this. They have UNLIMITED LIABILITY. This is a common area of 
confusion, which needs revising carefully. 
Forms of Business ownership 
The vast majority of start-ups and small businesses in the UK choose to operate either as a sole trader 
or set up as a private limited company.  A very small proportion of new businesses set up as a 
partnership and a small proportion of small businesses grow to become public limited companies.  
Sole traders 
Most businesses in the UK are small businesses, owned and operated by one person. In most cases, 
these businesses operate as a sole trader. 
Look at Yell.com or Yellow Pages (a local free business listing posted through your letterbox). You will 
see lots of examples of people operating as a sole trader in your area.   Many traders in the service 
sector e.g. hairdressers, gardeners, plumbers and electricians, use the sole trader option, as do people 
who run part-time or seasonal businesses. 
A sole trader is a popular form of business organisation, as it is simple and cheap to set up and operate. 
Most importantly the sole trader gets to keep all the profits! The sole trader, also takes all the risk and 
has unlimited liability, as already discussed. 
Do not forget that a sole trader can and do employ other people to work in their business! 
Partnerships 
A partnership is formed where a business is started and owned by more than one person. Common 
examples of partnerships are doctors, solicitors or vets.  
A legal document called a Partnership Agreement is always recommended and sets out how the 
partnership is run, which covers areas such as: 
• How profits are to be shared 
• How much each partner has to invest into the business 
• How decisions are to be taken 
• What happens if a partner wants to leave the partnership or dies 


===== PDF PAGE 47 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 46  
The partners own the business and have unlimited liability. 
Private limited company (Ltd) 
A company is formed when a business is set up to have a separate legal identity from its owners.  In the 
vast majority of cases, the type of company created is a private limited company (ltd). These are very 
common and can include small and very large businesses. There are many well-known examples of ltd 
companies, such as Iceland, Virgin, John Lewis and Clarks shoes. 
If a business becomes a private limited company, it can raise funds from investors, such as friends and 
family, but not from the general public, as its shares are not listed on the stock exchange. Every private 
limited company must have at least one shareholder. Any money raised from new shares is 
permanently invested in the business. 
In this type of business, the company's finances are separate from the owner’s personal finances.  The 
owners are known as shareholders, who each own shares in the company. They receive a share of the 
profits, known as a dividend, as a reward for being a shareholder. These are paid in proportion to the 
number of shares that they own. If the company goes bankrupt, shareholders are protected by limited 
liability.  
The business will be run by a Board of Directors, appointed by the shareholders. The shareholders may 
also act as the directors. The Board of Directors runs the company on a day-to-day basis and makes all 
the important decisions. 
Comparing limited companies with sole traders and partnerships  
The main differences between the different types of business ownership can be summarised as follows:  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
Sole trader  Quick and easy to set up – the 
business can always be 
transferred to a limited company 
once launched 
 Simple to run – owner has 
complete control over decision-
making 
 Decision-making is quick, 
important in changing, fast 
moving markets with lots of 
competition 
 Owner gets to keep all the profits 
 Minimal paperwork 
 Full personal liability i.e. 
“unlimited liability” 
 Harder to raise finance – sole 
traders often have limited funds of 
their own and few assets against 
which to raise loans 
 The business is the owner – the 
business suffers if the owner 
becomes ill, loses interest etc 
 Limited life as the business is the 
owner – lack of continuity 
 Stressful – long hours, no division 
of labour, no support with 
decision-making 
Partnership  Quite simple for two or more 
people to form a business 
together 
 Minimal paperwork once 
Partnership Agreement set up 
 Partners can provide specialist 
knowledge and skills 
 Jobs can be shared, so less 
 Unlimited liability  
 Partners have to live with 
decisions of others; a poor 
decision by one partner damages 
the interests of the other partners 
 Decision-making can take longer, 
as disagreements can occur 
 Harder to raise finance than a 


===== PDF PAGE 48 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 47  
 Advantages Disadvantages 
stressful than operating as a sole 
trader 
 Greater potential to raise finance 
compared to a sole trader, as each 
partner provides investment 
 Any losses will be shared 
company 
 Short life, as if one partner leaves 
or dies the partnership ends 
 Profits have to be shared 
Private 
Limited 
company 
 
 Limited liability - protects the 
personal wealth of the 
shareholders 
 Easier to raise finance as can sell 
shares 
 Stable form of structure – the 
company continues to exist even 
when shareholders change 
 Original owners are likely to retain 
control  
 Shareholders have to agree about 
how profits are distributed 
 Greater administrative costs than 
setting up as a sole trader or 
partnership 
 Finance limited to “friends and 
family” 
 Less privacy - public disclosure of 
company information, but not as 
extreme as for a plc 
 Directors’ legal duties are stricter 
Choosing the most suitable legal structure for a business 
There will be several factors that will influence the type of structure chosen by a business: 
• Size of business – start-up businesses often start as sole traders, as they are easier and quicker 
to set up compared to a Ltd. There is less paperwork involved. 
• Type of business – some business structures relate to the type of good or service provided. If 
specialist expertise is involved such as doctors, vets or lawyers they are more likely to be 
partnerships than sole traders. If significant risk is involved, the business is more likely to 
become a private limited company. 
• Lender requirements – if a bank loan is needed to start a business, the bank may prefer a small 
business to be set up a sole trader or partnership, to make sure they can be paid back by the 
individuals if the business fails. 
• Investment protection – a private limited company may be chosen, so the investors in a new 
business or an expanding business can be protected by limited liability. 
• Control – the owner, as a sole trader or a shareholder, holding the majority of shares in a 
company, has total control of the business. This is shared in a partnership and at risk in a 
company with a minority shareholding. 
Franchising 
A business idea for a start-up does not have to be original. Many new businesses are formed with the 
intention of offering an existing business idea.  The use of franchises is a great example of that.  
The basic idea for a franchise is this.  A franchisor grants a licence, the franchise, to another business, 
the franchisee, to allow it to trade using the brand or business format.  There will be restrictions on the 
franchisee regarding its goods or services and its sources of materials, but it is a low risk and relatively 
low cost of option that does allow a franchisee to have some independence and freedom. 
Remember that the franchisor is in charge - the franchisor is the original owner of the business idea. 


===== PDF PAGE 49 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 48  
Franchises are a significant and increasing part of business life in the UK.  Based on the BFA/NatWest 
franchise survey (2015) here are some quick statistics that illustrate this fact: 
• Percentage of units profitable (including new businesses): 97% 
• Franchises generated annual sales of £15.1 billion in the UK in 2015, selling through 44,200 
franchised outlets, employing 621,000 people 
• There are over 901 different franchisor brands in the UK, with new franchise ideas becoming 
available every year 
• Average turnover or revenue continues to rise; in 2015 over half had an annual turnover of more 
than £250,000 
• Start-up costs may not be too expensive and can be as little as £10,000 and are typically about 
£50,000 
• In 2015, over 97% of franchises, including new businesses, were profitable 
• Franchises are particularly popular in the service (tertiary) sector.  Franchises offering property 
services, for example estate agency, cleaning, gardening, food etc are the most popular 
Examples of well-known businesses that use franchising to expand their operations include: 
• Subway 
• McDonalds 
• Starbucks 
• Pizza Hut 
• Thorntons 
• KFC 
• Europcar 
 
You might have noticed from the list above that nearly all those businesses provide services rather than 
produce goods.  Franchising is particularly suitable for service businesses. 
Advantages of running a franchise 
For a start-up entrepreneur, there are several advantages to investing in a franchise: 
 It is still the franchisee’s own business – even if they are paying royalties to the franchisor! 
 The investment should be in a tried and tested format and brand 
 The franchisee gets advice, support and training.  The franchisor will also supply key equipment, 
such as IT systems, which are designed to support the operation of the business 
 It is easier to raise finance - the high street banks have significant experience of providing 
finance to franchises 
 No industry expertise is required in most cases 
 The franchisee benefits from the buying power of the franchisor 
 It is easier to build a customer base – the franchise brand name will already be established and 
many potential customers should already be aware of it 
 The franchisee is usually given an exclusive geographical area in which to operate the franchise – 
which limits the competition, since operators of the same franchise are not in direct competition 
with each other 
Overall, investing in a franchise is a lower risk method of starting a business and there is a lower chance 
of business failure. 


===== PDF PAGE 50 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 49  
Disadvantages of running a franchise 
There are several disadvantages for the franchisee: 
 Franchises are not cheap!  The franchisee has to pay substantial initial fees and ongoing royalties 
and commission.  He/she may also have to buy goods directly from the franchisor at a mark-up 
 There are restrictions on marketing activities, for example not being allowed to undercut nearby 
franchises, and on selling the business 
 There is always a risk that the franchisor will go out of business 
 The franchise needs to earn enough profit to satisfy both the franchisee and franchisor - there 
may not be enough to go round! 
There are many good franchise opportunities available for a start-up, but some poor ones too. There is 
therefore, still a need for the entrepreneur to conduct market research into the franchise before 
deciding to invest in one. 
A franchise is a kind of "halfway house" for a keen entrepreneur. It is a lower risk method of entering a 
market and it is often easier to raise finance.  However, running a franchise does not offer the same 
kind of long-term financial rewards that owning a business outright can. 
Business location 
Where to locate is an important decision for all organisations. This is especially true however, for a new 
business. Should it be based at home or located in a nearby office, shop or industrial unit? How will new 
technology impact on this decision? 
Location is also important for existing or growing businesses. Should they stay where they are? Do they 
need bigger premises? Would it be an advantage to relocate to somewhere else, either in this country 
or to a different country? Can the business use modern technology to create a “virtual business,” so 
that its employees are all working from home? 
Not every kind of start-up business can be based at home.  For a new coffee shop, for example, a strong 
location is vital to ensure enough customers visit the store. 
One of the most important considerations about location for any business will be cost. A start-up 
business is likely to have limited financial resources and therefore will want to minimise its set-up costs, 
whereas an existing business is likely to have competitors and will want to keep costs low, in order for it 
to have the opportunity to compete more effectively on price. Having premises will mean that a 
business will have to pay rent, rates, insurance and many other ongoing costs, as well as the rental 
deposit or purchase costs. 
Other factors determining location 
Whatever the business, there are several general factors, in addition to cost, that influence the choice 
of location. These are: 
Raw materials The business may depend on supplies of a particular raw material, so costs will be 
lower if the business is located near the supplier, for example where the raw 
material is grown or where a distributor is based. This factor tends to be more 
important for primary and manufacturing businesses, rather than businesses in the 
tertiary (service) sector. 


===== PDF PAGE 51 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 50  
Labour When a start-up business needs to hire employees, then access to a reliable supply 
of skilled staff will be important.  Businesses that are labour-intensive often look to 
locate in areas of traditionally low wages or higher unemployment, although this will 
depend on the skill level that the business needs and the availability of this type of 
worker. This factor is important for all businesses, but may be less significant if the 
business uses a lot of machinery. 
Market - 
customers and 
population 
Businesses may need to be located near particular centres of population.  For 
example, if the product is targeted at a particular type of customer, for example 
older-aged people, then it is important to be located where they live. This is 
particularly important for businesses in the tertiary sector, as they provide a service.  
Government 
assistance 
This may be available to set up in a particular location. These “assisted areas” are 
considered to be the poorer parts of the country and may have less wealthy 
customers. They may however, have cheaper labour available. Assistance may come 
in the form of grants, loans, reduced tax burdens or use of government owned 
buildings. 
Communications This includes transport facilities (road, rail, air), as well as information and 
infrastructure.  Transport links are particularly important if the business delivers 
products, uses a sales force or depends on imports and exports to function.  The 
continued popularity of e-commerce makes transport links increasingly important, 
to ensure products can be delivered to customers in a timely manner. Information 
technology is less of an issue these days, as even new businesses can normally have 
fast and reliable broadband internet connections. 
Competition All businesses need to be aware of where their competitors are based when 
deciding on their own business location. This is particularly important if the business 
is providing a service. If a new business sees a “gap in the market” where there is no 
competitor, this might be a good reason to locate there. However, this might mean 
that this is not a profitable location for any business.  
In some cases it may be of benefit to be near a competitor, as customers may come 
to the competitor, but see another business that is nearby. This can be seen with 
the popularity of retailers located in retail parks or clothing stores being clustered 
together in shopping centres. 
There is no magic formula which can be applied in deciding the most important factors in choosing a 
location.  Sometimes the convenience of the location for the entrepreneur will be more important than 
even cost considerations.  
The type of business (primary, secondary or tertiary) will also be important as primary industries will 
need to be located where their raw materials are and many tertiary businesses will need to be near 
their customers for the service to be provided. Manufacturing businesses will be influenced by many 
different factors such as availability of materials and labour, as well as distribution to their customers.   
The short term and long term objectives of the business can also be significant, for example, will a 
business have enough room to expand if it needs to increase output in the future? 


===== PDF PAGE 52 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 51  
Marketing mix 
Introduction to the marketing mix 
The marketing mix consists of four elements and represents the way in which a business uses the 
following four factors to reach customers: 
 Product - the good or service that the customer obtains 
 Price - how much the customer pays for the product 
 Place (distribution) – how the product is distributed to the customer 
 Promotion - how the customer is found and persuaded to buy the product 
It is known as a “mix” because each ingredient affects the others and the mix must overall be suitable to 
the target customer. 
For example: 
• High quality materials used in a product can mean that a higher price is obtainable 
• An advertising campaign carried out in one area of the country, promotion, requires distribution 
of the product to be in place in advance of the campaign to ensure there are no disappointed 
customers 
• Promotion is needed to emphasise the new features of a product 
 
An effective marketing mix is one which: 
• Meets customer needs 
• Achieves the marketing objectives 
• Is balanced and consistent 
• Allows the business to gain an advantage over competitors 
The marketing mix for each business and industry will vary; it will also vary over time. 
For most businesses, one or two elements of the mix will be seen as relatively more important than the 
others, as illustrated below: 
 



===== PDF PAGE 53 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 52  
 
Changes to the marketing mix 
A good example of how changes take place over time is the use of e-commerce. Whereas the retail 
outlets for electrical goods used to be very important, nowadays price and how quick and conveniently 
delivery can be arranged is much more critical in getting a sale. Digitial communication has also changed 
many aspects of promotion, with the extensive use of websites and social media now playing a critical 
part of even a small business’s marketing plans. 
The popularity of online and price comparison sites have also made pricing more visible. Consumers are 
now able to compare very quickly different prices, reviews about the good or service, and then make an 
informed choice about which product to purchase within a matter of minutes. This means that 
businesses have to constantly be aware of the information being displayed on their wesbite, as to 
whether it is up to date and effective. 
Customers’ needs and wants will always be changing. This can be seen in the “keep fit” market, where 
new products are constantly being developed, launched and promoted. The Fitbit for example, is priced 
relatively high and has expensive promotion to support the product and the price. This often makes it 
difficult for small businesses to compete, which is why they will need to look carefully for a gap in the 
market or operate in a market niche where there are less competitors. 
Business plans 
In order to be successful businesses will need to plan. In most cases, this will be through the creation of 
a business plan. A well-used and famous saying is “failing to plan is planning to fail”.  
What is a business plan? 
A business plan is a written document that describes a business, its objectives, its strategies, the market 
it is in and its financial forecasts.  The business plan has many functions, from securing external funding, 
to measuring success within the business. 
Although a start-up business will need a business plan, the existence of such a document will also be 
important for an existing business. In this case the plan might be for a longer period and will need to be 
reviewed on a regular basis.  
Information that should be included in a business plan 
A simple business plan is suitable for a start-up business and is written by the entrepreneur. It 
summarises the key aims and targets of the business and the actions required to achieve them. The plan 
will include areas such as: 
• The idea - a simple description of the proposed business with its location 
• Where the idea came from and why it is a good one 
• Objectives and key aims for the business - sales, profit, growth (gives a sense of direction for the 
business) ideally for the next 3-4 years 
• Finance required and sources of finance - how much from the owners, how much to be loaned 
over how long and from whom 
• Market overview – results of market research, main segments, target market, market size (value, 
quantity), growth, market share of main competitors (if known) 


===== PDF PAGE 54 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 53  
• How the business will operate (location, premises, staff, distribution methods) 
• Marketing mix – description of these four elements 
• Cash-flow forecast (important to ensure the business does not run out of cash)  
• Forecast revenue, costs and profits 
The purpose of business plans 
The main reasons why a start-up business should produce a business plan are: 
• Provides a focus on the business ideas - is it really a good one and why? 
• Produces a document that helps clarify thoughts and identify any gaps in information or 
research 
• It encourages the business entrepreneur to focus on what the business is really about and how 
customers and finance-providers can be convinced to buy and lend the business money 
• It helps test the financial viability of the idea by including forecasts of revenue, costs, profits and 
cash-flow 
• A business plan will minimise the risk of failure - can the business achieve the required level of 
profitability and not run out of cash? 
• The plan provides something which can be used to measure actual performance 
• A business plan is essential to raising finance from outside providers, such as investors and 
banks, as it will provide evidence that any loans can be repaid 
In addition existing small businesses will use this process: 
• to review their current performance  
• allows business objectives to be modified if required 
• allows departments of the business to produce their own plans, for example marketing plan, 
human resources plan.  
• to update their current business strategy or plans for the future, based on their current 
performance, changes to the business environment, over which they have little control, and 
revise objectives 
• overall it will help the business make informed decisions 
  


===== PDF PAGE 55 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 54
