2.2 Making marketing decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Product The design mix 
The product life cycle 
Extension strategies 
Product differentiation 
Price Pricing strategies 
Influences on pricing strategies 
Promotion Promotional strategies 
Technology in promotion 
Place Methods of distribution 
Using the marketing mix in 
business decisions 
Relationships between marketing mix components 
Building competitive advantage through the marketing mix 
 
Product 
We live in a time of rapid technological development and constant change. Whilst some products may 
last for a long time, most do not. There is therefore a constant need to develop new goods and services 
to meet the changing wants and needs of customers.  
The design mix 
Good design is not just about having an attractive product. Good design also takes into account a 
product’s usefulness and its cost, as well as its look! 
The traditional product design mix emphasises three elements: 
• Function - The way the product works; does it do what it needs to do? Is the product reliable? 
• Aesthetics – does the product appeal to the customer in terms of how it looks and feels? This is 
often based on the subjective judgement of customers and is a popular way to differentiate a 
product from its competitors. 
• Cost - does the design allow the product to be made and sold profitably? How much value is 
added during the production process? The difference between the costs of making something 
and what a business can sell it for is the value added that allows a profit to be made. 


===== PDF PAGE 91 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 90  
The mix of features required for a successful design of a product is often shown as an interrelated 
triangle: 
 
Function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aesthetics                          Cost 
Products can be located on the triangle to show the balance between the three features. A long lasting 
successful product is likely to be located in the centre of the triangle showing a balance in the product’s 
features.  
All businesses will focus on costs and operating efficiently. The two other parts of the design mix are 
now explained in further depth: 
Common features of products that successfully emphasise function in the design mix: 
• Demand is more stable and predictable  
• Longer product life cycles 
• Lower promotional costs 
• A reputation for quality based on reliability 
• Economic to manufacture through low average costs based on high production 
Common features of products that successfully emphasise aesthetics in the design mix 
• High added value 
• Demand fuelled by customer aspirations 
• Potentially shorter product life cycle 
• Attracts imitation, so there is need for design protection, for example patents, copyright 
• Need for greater promotional support  
Product life cycle 
The product life cycle is an important concept in marketing.  It describes the stages a product goes 
through from when it was first thought of until it is finally removed from the market. Not all products 
reach this final stage.  Some continue to grow and others rise and fall.   
The main stages of the product life cycle are: 
• Introduction – researching, developing and then launching the product 


===== PDF PAGE 92 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 91  
Sales 
• Growth – when sales are increasing at their fastest rate 
• Maturity – sales are near their highest, but the rate of growth is slowing down because new 
competitors are entering the market or the market has become saturated with different versions 
of essentially the same product 
• Decline – final stage of the cycle, when sales begin to fall and ultimately the product will be 
removed from the market 
The product life cycle can be illustrated in a diagram, by looking at the sales during the time period of a 
particular product: 
 
Extension strategies extend the life of the product before it goes into decline.  Again, businesses use 
various marketing techniques to improve the sales of an existing product.   
Examples of these techniques include: 
• Advertising – try to gain a new audience or remind the current audience of the product 
• Price reduction – makes the product more attractive to customers 
• Adding value – add new features to the current product, for example video messaging on smart 
phones 
• Explore new or different markets – for example try selling the product in other countries 
• New packaging – brightening up old packaging or making small changes, such as putting crisps in 
foil packets  
 
However successful extension strategies might be, there will still come a time when the sales of a 
product will make it uneconomic for a business to continue to produce it. This could be because 
there is a replacement product or because the product is no longer wanted. Black and white TVs, 
videos, audio tapes and early versions of mobile phones will never gain any sales, however well they 
are advertised or how cheap they are! 
Product differentiation 
In a competitive market, firms will seek to make their product different from their rivals. This could be 
through different features or designs. If the product has something that no other product has, this is its 
unique selling point (USP). Having a USP will allow the business to charge a higher price and create 



===== PDF PAGE 93 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 92  
customer loyalty. This, in turn, will enable the business to develop a brand for its product, where 
customers will return to the business for repeat purchases. They will also buy other products that are 
associated with the same brand which they perceive as being good value. 
If a business has a unique feature, then it can apply for legal protection for the feature or brand to 
ensure it cannot be copied. Dyson vacuum cleaners, Head and Shoulders shampoo and Rolls Royce cars 
can all claim to have unique selling points. If products are successful through their USP, other firms will 
ultimately try and imitate them, if they legally can – normally at a cheaper price. 
Price 
The pricing strategies that a business uses for its goods or services is one of the most important 
business decisions management will make. Setting a price that is too high or too low will, at best, limit 
business growth. At worst, it could cause serious problems for sales and cash-flow. 
This reinforces the fact that setting the selling price of a product is a very important decision. The bad 
news for entrepreneurs and all businesses is that pricing is really tough to get right.  There are so many 
factors to consider, and much uncertainty about whether a price change will have the desired effect the 
business was hoping for. 
High price or low price? 
The law of demand states that, for nearly all products, the higher the price the lower the demand.  In 
other words, sales will fall if prices are increased.  However, higher prices can also mean higher profits.  
Price is such an important factor for some businesses that it will form part of their overall business 
objectives and will therefore be a key component of their marketing mix.  
The effects on two different businesses of a change in price are given below:  
Example 1: 
A hotel chain specialising in business travel found that in the recent economic recession demand for its 
services had decreased and that often its hotels were only half full, a situation that was even worse at 
the weekends. The chain decided to decrease prices by an average of 25% and by the end of the year its 
average occupancy rate, or the number of times the rooms were booked, was over 90%. This meant 
that revenue and profits increased significantly for the chain. 
Example 2: 
A company supplying fruit and vegetables to a large supermarket chain found its profits getting lower, 
as costs increased and the price it charged its customers stayed the same. The business decided to 
increase its prices by 10%. As a result, the supermarket decided to decrease the amount it bought from 
the company and increase purchases from the many alternative suppliers it could use. As a result, the 
fruit and vegetable company’s sales fell by 50% and revenue dropped similarly, which had a negative 
knock on effect on its profit. 
As can be seen from the two examples, it could be a good idea to reduce prices a little if there is a 
significant increase in sales. Similarly, it is not a good idea to increase prices if there is going to be 
significant fall in sales, although the business might benefit if the fall in sales is very small, as revenue 
may increase, despite the number of units falling. 
A new business or an existing business launching a new product would have similar choices. It could 
enter the market with a high price, because the product is unique and will appeal to those customers 


===== PDF PAGE 94 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 93  
who like to be first to have a new product. Many technology products, such as smart phones, use this 
pricing strategy. Alternatively, businesses could enter the market with a low price, with the aim of 
getting good sales and market share and building up brand loyalty, which would enable them to 
increase their selling prices at a later date. 
Factors that affect pricing decisions 
Some of the more important influences that a business needs to consider when setting the selling price 
are: 
• Objectives – what are the objectives of the firm? Is it for a “high price, high quality” business? Or 
has it a “low margin, high sales” strategy?  
• Competitors – this is really important. Competitor strength influences whether a business can 
set prices independently or whether it simply has to follow the normal market price. Price 
comparison sites often allow competitor price information to be easily accessed and due to this, 
businesses will be fairly similar in terms of price in some industries. Electrical good prices, such 
as televisions, are often fairly similar as so many are now brought online and therefore it is easy 
to gauge prices through price comparison sites. 
• Customers – the market segment which is targeted by the business will influence the selling 
price set. Factors such as age, income levels, location will impact on the decision. 
• Costs – a business cannot ignore the cost of production or buying a product when it comes to 
setting a selling price.  In the long-term, a business will fail if it sells for less than cost or if its 
gross profit margin is too low to cover the expenses or overheads of the business. 
• Product life cycle - pricing methods will change dependent on the stage the product is at in its 
product life cycle. For example, the price of a product in the decline stage of its product life-
cycle will need to be lower than when it was first launched. 
• The state of the market for the product – if there is a high demand for the product but a 
shortage of supply, then the business can put prices up. 
• The state of the economy – some products are more sensitive to changes in unemployment and 
workers’ wages than others.  Manufacturers of luxury products may need to drop prices to 
stimulate demand, especially when the economy is not doing well. 
• The bargaining power of customers in the target market – who are the buyers of the product? 
Do they have any bargaining power over the price set?  An individual consumer has little 
bargaining power over a supermarket, although they can take their custom elsewhere.  
However, an industrial or business customer that buys substantial quantities of a product from 
another firm may be able to negotiate lower or special prices. 
• Legislation in the market – some businesses operate in markets where prices are regulated by 
government legislation, for example the rail industry. 
Promotion 
The main aim of promotion is to ensure that customers are aware of the existence and positioning of 
products. Without this information customers will not be aware that the product exists. It is no good 
having a special offer on a product and not telling customers about it!  
Promotion is also used to persuade customers that one product is better than competing products and 
to remind customers about why they may want to buy it. 
Promotional activities can therefore have a variety of aims: 


===== PDF PAGE 95 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 94  
• To inform current and potential customers about existing and new products 
• To explain the potential benefits of using the product 
• To persuade customers to buy the product 
• To compete with other businesses and show why a product is different or better than 
competitors 
• To increase growth through more sales to existing customers or sell in new markets 
• To present, change or improve an image of a business and to develop and sustain a brand 
• To remind customers about a product and reassure them that they have made the right choice 
Methods of promotion 
It is a common mistake to believe that promotion is all about advertising. It isn’t! There are a variety of 
approaches that a business can take to get their message across to customers, although advertising is 
certainly an important one. 
It is important to understand that a business will use more than one method of promotion. The 
combination of methods used by a business in its promotional strategy is referred to as the promotional 
mix. Three of the most important types of promotion are advertising, public relations/sponsorship and 
sales promotion or special offers. In recent years, social media has also become widely used and is very 
important in promoting a good or service. 
Advertising 
Advertising is any method of promotion that is paid for. Advertising presents or promotes the product 
to the target audience through different communication media such as TV, radio, cinema, 
billboards/posters, online and newspapers or magazines. 
The problem with advertising is that consumers are bombarded with advertising messages every day.  
How can a business get their message across effectively?  And how can a business measure the 
effectiveness of an advertising campaign? It is often said that businesses waste half their advertising 
spend – the problem is that they don’t know which half! 
When deciding which type of advertising to use a business needs to consider factors like: 
• Reach of the media – national or local; number of potential customers it could reach; how long 
before the message is seen 
• Nature of the product – the choice of media needs to reflect the image of the product; a 
recruitment advert would be placed in a trade magazine or newspaper, but a lipstick 
advertisement would be shown on television or in a magazine targeted at women 
• Position in the product life cycle – the launch stage will require different types of advertising 
from products undergoing extension strategies 
• Cost of advert and size of advertising budget – for example, local newspaper advertising is 
cheaper than radio, which in turn is cheaper than television. But the business will also want to 
consider cost per head, i.e. the cost of reaching each potential customer, if aiming to reach a 
larger audience 
• Online or offline – there has been substantial growth in businesses that advertise online, as they 
swap some, or sometimes all, of their advertising budgets to reach internet users 
Advertising can also be split into two main types: 
• Persuasive advertising - this tries to entice the customer to buy the product by informing them 
of the product benefit 


===== PDF PAGE 96 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 95  
• Informative advertising - this gives the customer information and is largely carried out by the 
government, for example health campaigns, new welfare benefits 
The main advantages and disadvantages of advertising as a method of promotion are: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Wide coverage – can reach mass audiences 
 Control of message being promoted 
 Segmentation possible through choice of 
media used, for example children’s 
television 
 Repetition means that the message can be 
communicated effectively 
 Can be used to build brand loyalty  
 Often expensive; TV is very expensive 
 Impersonal and not very accurate in aiming 
at customers, so high wastage 
 One way communication and no guarantee 
the message is being received 
 Not all potential customers will use the 
chosen media: TV, internet, radio, 
newspapers 
 Easy to get lost in the amount of competing 
adverts, for example posters, internet 
 Limited ability to close a sale 
Branding a product 
A brand is a product with unique character, for instance in design or image.  It is consistent and well 
recognised. Branding is often used as a vital part of the promotional process. 
The advantages of having a strong brand are that it: 
 Inspires customer loyalty, leading to repeat sales and word-of mouth recommendation. 
 The brand owner can usually charge higher prices, especially if the brand is the market leader. 
 Retailers or service sellers want to stock top selling brands.  With limited shelf space, it is more 
likely the top brands will be on the shelves in leading stores rather than less well-known brands. 
Some retailers use “own-label” brands, where they use their name in the product’s name, for example 
“Tesco Finest” or “Sainsbury Taste the Difference”, rather than the manufacturers name, such as Heinz. 
Supermarket own brands tend to be cheaper and will give the retailer more profit, than selling the 
manufacturers brands. 
Some brands are so strong they have become global brands.  This means that the product is sold in 
many countries and the contents are very similar.  Examples of global brands include Microsoft, Coca 
Cola, Disney, Mercedes and Hewlett Packard.   
The strength of a brand can be exploited by a business to develop new products.  This is known as brand 
extension i.e. developing a new product with some of the brand’s original characteristics included in it.  
Examples include Dove soap and Dove shampoo, which both contain a moisturising factor, Mars bar and 
Mars ice cream, which clearly have many close similarities. 
Brand stretching is where the brand is used for a diverse range of products, not necessarily connected, 
for example Virgin trains and Virgin media, Marks and Spencer clothes and food. Brand stretching will 
help to drive sales for the business, particularly if the brand is well respected and trusted. 
The logo on a product is an important part of the product.  A logo is a symbol or picture that represents 
the business.  It is important because it is easy to recognise, establishes brand loyalty and can create a 
favourable image. 


===== PDF PAGE 97 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 96  
Sponsorship 
Sponsorship is a specialist type of public relations and is becoming increasingly popular, particularly 
with larger businesses. A business will donate money to an event, team or individual, in return for which 
they will display the business name or logo. This will build brand awareness. A secondary objective 
might be to emphasise social or ethical policies, but most sponsorship really does have a targeted 
commercial objective.  
Major sporting events, sports celebrities and sporting teams all benefit from substantial business 
sponsorship.  At a local level, it is common for small businesses to sponsor local teams or to donate 
prizes to local events. 
Sales promotion 
Sales promotion is the process of persuading a potential customer to buy the product. It takes place 
near to where the purchasing decision will take place, for example in a shop, and therefore is often 
referred to as taking place at point of sale (pos).  Sales promotion is designed to be used as a short-
term tactic to boost sales. It is not really designed to build long-term customer loyalty.  
There are many methods of sales promotion, including: 
 Product trials - a free or reduced price product may be given as a sample with the hope that 
consumers will then continue to buy the product in the future. Magazine collections are good 
examples and more recently TV film providers, such as Netflix and Amazon Prime. 
 Money off coupons – customers receive coupons, for example coupons cut out of newspapers or 
a products packaging, that enables them to buy the product at a reduced price 
 Additional products – for example buy one get one free (BOGOF); often seen as encouraging 
waste, but a business can sell stock quickly 
 Competitions – buying the product will allow the customer to take part in a chance to win a 
prize; can encourage repeat purchases as well as one off sales 
 Special offers/discount vouchers or temporary price reductions– these encourage customers to 
try new products or relaunched products; these offers can then be removed once customers 
become loyal 
 Free gifts/samples – a free product when a customer buys another product; samples are 
sometimes given to try a product for free, in the hope that customers will then buy the product 
at a later date 
 Displays - near check outs or on shelves in stores can be used to encourage sale of a particular 
product; this is why chocolate confectionary products are often displayed near the till in many 
food retailers 
 Loyalty cards – these are now offered by many retailers and petrol stations. Customers are able 
to earn points for buying certain goods or shopping that can later be exchanged for money, 
goods or other offers. They also provide information to the business about the shopping habits 
of customers – where they shop, when and what they buy.  This is very valuable marketing 
research and can be used in the planning process for new and existing products 
  


===== PDF PAGE 98 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 97  
The main advantages and disadvantages of sales promotion are: 
Advantages  Disadvantages  
 Effective at achieving a quick boost to sales 
and can be used to sell stock that is not 
selling fast enough 
 Encourages customers to try a product or 
switch brands 
 Sales effect may only be short-term 
 Customers may come to expect or 
anticipate further promotions  
 Some customers only buy special offers 
 May damage brand image 
When undertaking a sales promotion, there are several factors that a business must take into account in 
judging its effectiveness: 
• What does the promotion cost – will the resulting sales boost justify the investment? 
• Is the sales promotion consistent with the brand image?  A promotion that heavily discounts a 
product with a premium price might create some long-term damage to a brand 
• Will the sales promotion attract customers who will continue to buy the product once the 
promotion ends or will it simply attract those customers who are always on the look-out for a 
bargain? 
Using technology in promotion 
The increased use of the internet has allowed cheaper and far more accurate promotional strategies. 
Advertising can be linked to the profile of customers using particular websites and allows businesses to 
capture customer and potential customer details and then communicate with them through special 
offers, e-newsletters, blogs and many other promotions and reminders. 
Social media is both a location for advertising and also a method of advertising. Viral advertising 
through sharing sites, such as used in Facebook and YouTube, can create real excitement about a 
product or new product and as a result, can create massive brand awareness very quickly. This often 
costs very little, but it is clearly very hard for a business to guarantee success.  
Smart phones also provide a new opportunity for promotion and the development of “Apps” by 
businesses allows communication to be easily made with a customer – and for the customer to interact 
with the business through e-commerce or m-commerce. 
Factors influencing the choice of promotion 
 
There are many factors that will influence which mix of promotional methods a business will choose to 
use: 
 
• Budget: all forms of promotion can be very expensive. TV advertising costs run into millions of 
pounds and even a box advert in a local newspaper can be over £1,000. Some businesses will 
spend up to 10% of their total costs on advertising. Often it is difficult to directly link promotion 
costs with sales increases, but without promotion there would be no customers! 
• Type of product: some products are produced for other businesses to buy rather than the public 
in general. A tractor company would be better advised to have a stall at an agricultural show or 
an advert in a farmer’s magazine, rather than a TV advertising campaign.  
• Type of customer: choice of promotional strategy will be different depending who the target 
customers are. For example the Waitrose and Marks and Spencer’s food stores will have very 
different target customers to Lidl and Aldi and will use different promotional strategies. 


===== PDF PAGE 99 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 98  
• Competition: the promotional strategy of a competitor will influence a business’s own strategy. 
Advertising and sales promotion will often imitate the strategy of a competitor and competitors 
may retaliate to any promotional strategy that a business undertakes.   
• Product life cycle: if the product is new or relates to a new business then the aim of promotion 
will be to make customers aware that it exists. In this case, advertising or PR will be most 
appropriate. If the customers are aware of the product, but need persuading to buy it then sales 
promotion is very helpful.  
• Expertise: although it will not necessarily change their strategy, larger businesses are likely to 
have their own marketing and promotional departments. They will be able to design and 
implement their own initiatives.  In other cases and for smaller firms, they may have to use 
marketing or PR agencies who will be able to provide specialist help and advice. 
 
Place 
Place, or its more common name “distribution”, is about how a business gets its products to the 
customers.   
It is one thing having a great product, sold at an attractive price.   But what if: 
• Customers are not near a retailer that is selling the product? 
• A competing product is stocked by a much wider range of outlets? 
• A competitor is winning because it has a team of trained distributors or sales agents who are out 
there meeting customers and closing the sale?  
Distribution matters for a business of any size – it is a crucial part of the marketing mix. 
The objective of distribution is clear.  It is: 
“To make products available in the right place at the right time in the right quantities” 
Distribution is achieved by using one or more distribution channels, including: 
• Retailers 
• Wholesalers 
• Distributors / sales agents 
• Direct, for example via e-commerce/e-tailers or telesales 
The role of a distribution channel 
A distribution channel can be defined as: 
"all the organisations through which a product must pass between its point of production and 
consumption" 
Looking at that definition, it can be seen that a product might pass through several stages before it 
finally reaches the consumer.  The organisations involved in each stage of distribution are commonly 
referred to as “intermediaries”. 
Why does a business give the job of selling its products to intermediaries? After all, using an 
intermediary means giving up some control over how products are sold and who they are sold to. An 
intermediary will also want to make a profit by getting involved. 


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 99  
The answer lies in efficiency of distribution costs. Intermediaries are specialists in selling. They have the 
contacts, experience and scale of operation, which means that greater sales can be achieved than if the 
producing business tried to run a sales operation itself. 
The main function of a distribution channel is to provide a link between production and the consumer 
who will ultimately use the product.  
How many stages in the distribution channel? 
A distribution channel can have several stages depending on how many organisations are involved in it: 
 
Looking at the diagram: 
Channel 1 contains two stages between producer and consumer - a wholesaler and a retailer. A 
wholesaler typically buys and stores large quantities of several producers’ goods and then breaks into 
bulk deliveries to supply retailers with smaller quantities. For small retailers with limited order 
quantities, for example the local corner shop, the use of wholesalers makes economic sense.  
Channel 2 contains one intermediary a retailer. The consumer electrical goods market in the UK is 
typical of this arrangement whereby producers such as Sony, Panasonic, Canon etc. sell their goods 
directly to large retailers such as Currys, Tesco and Amazon, which then sell onto the final consumers. 
Channel 3 is called a "direct-marketing" or “direct-sale” channel, since it has no intermediary levels. In 
this case the manufacturer sells directly to customers. This is increasingly used as e-commerce becomes 
more popular. Many holiday companies market direct to consumers, bypassing the traditional retail 
intermediary - the travel agent.  
We will now consider these intermediaries in more detail: 
Retailers 
Retailers are the most popular distribution channel for consumer goods, as they operate outlets that 
trade directly with household customers. Retailers can be classified in several ways: 
• Type of goods being sold (e.g. clothes, grocery, furniture) 
• Type of service (e.g. self-service, counter-service) 
• Size (e.g. corner shop; superstore) 
• Ownership (e.g. privately-owned independent; public-quoted retail group) 
• Location (e.g. rural, city-centre, out-of-town) 
• Brand (e.g. nationwide retail brands; local one-shop name) 



===== PDF PAGE 101 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 100  
Retailers enable producers to reach a wider audience, particularly if broad coverage by the major retail 
chains can be obtained. The big disadvantage to using a retailer is the loss of profit margin.  A high 
street retailer will typically look to take at least 40-50% of the final consumer price, depending on the 
nature of the product and the speed of stock turnover. 
Wholesalers 
Wholesalers stock a range of products from several producers. The role of the wholesaler is to sell onto 
retailers. Wholesalers usually specialise in particular products, for example food products.  
 The advantage of wholesalers is they “break the bulk” that is they will receive direct loads from 
producers and split this into smaller units for retailers. This means that retailers can hold less 
stock. 
 However, the costs are increased due to the wholesaler’s “middle-man” profits. 
Overall there are several potential advantages of using an intermediary: 
 More efficient distribution logistics 
 Costs, even taking into account the intermediaries’ profit or commission, may be lower 
 Consumers may expect choice i.e. the products and brands of many producers at the point of 
sale 
 Producers may not have sufficient resources or expertise to sell direct 
Selling direct (including e-tailers) 
A key decision a business has to make about distribution is whether to sell “direct”. 
Direct marketing means selling products by dealing directly with consumers rather than through 
intermediaries.  
Traditional methods include mail order, direct-mail selling, cold calling, telephone selling (telesales), 
and door-to-door calling. More recently telemarketing, direct radio selling, magazine and TV advertising, 
and on-line computer shopping i.e. e-commerce have been developed. This has given rise to the 
development of e-tailers who make sales through e-commerce and then distribute their product direct 
to the consumers. 
The main advantages of selling direct are that: 
 there is no need to share profit margins  
 the producer has complete control over the sales process 
 products are not sold alongside those of competitors.  
There may also be specific market factors that encourage direct selling: 
• There may be a need for an expert sales force, to demonstrate products, provide detailed pre -
sale information and after-sales service 
• Retailers, distributors, dealers and other intermediaries may be unwilling to sell the product 
• Existing distribution channels may be owned by, or linked to, competing producers, making it 
harder to obtain distribution by any other means than direct 
 However, there are significant costs associated with selling direct which may be higher than the 
costs associated with using an intermediary to generate the same level of sales. A small business 


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 101  
that produces boxes of cauliflowers will find it cheaper and more time efficient to use a retailer 
to sell the cauliflowers rather than driving round every possible customer in a van. 
What is the best distribution channel for a product? 
What factors should be taken into account in choosing the best distribution channel? Here is a 
summary: 
• Nature of the product: is it technical/complex? Complex products are often sold by specialist 
distributors or agents. Cars will often use this type of approach. 
• Customised: a direct distribution approach often works best for a product that the end 
consumer wants produced to a distinct specification. A wedding cake, made to measure clothing 
– or even double glazing are all examples! 
• Image of the product – if intermediaries are to be used, then it is essential that those chosen are 
suitable and relevant for the product. Top brands in clothes and cosmetics will want their 
products sold through John Lewis not through Primark! 
• The market, for example is it geographically spread? Does it involve selling overseas? If selling 
products overseas, then a car manufacturer business might use an overseas agent to distribute 
and sell their cars. 
• The extent and nature of the competition – which distribution channels and intermediaries do 
competitors use? Apple might not wish to sell their products through a shop that also sells 
Samsung products. 
• The business size – small businesses may have to use wholesalers as they cannot store a large 
amount of stock. They might also use intermediaries, such as agents, if they are too small to 
afford an in-house sales and distribution force. 
• Its business objectives – are they linked to revenue or profit maximisation? 
• How much control does it want over distribution?  The longer the channel, the less control is 
available. Some manufacturers will want to control how a product is displayed, the price charged 
and the promotional method used. 
Using the marketing mix to make business decisions 
 
The use and importance of the ingredients of the marketing mix will very much depend on the good or 
service being produced. A high quality perfume will be more focused on promotion and product than 
price. This would compare with milk, where the product is much more standard and there is limited 
need for promotion. Therefore, price would be more critical in this instance. 
 
Some of the more important factors affecting the use of the marketing mix are as follow: 
 
• Competition – if there is little or no competition then a business may not attach much priority to 
its marketing at all. Although neglecting the product and the development of new products 
would not be recommended. The business would be more likely charge a higher price compared 
to being in a very competitive market, where more is likely to be spent on branding and 
promotion. 
• Market segment – Some market segments will be less receptive to some aspects of the 
marketing mix. E-tailing may not be as successful with retired customers as it might be with 
teenagers. Retired customers might value a more convenient distribution channel. 
• Nature of the product – sacks of potatoes will not be ideal products for e-tailing. However, the 
quality and price of the product will be critical for customer satisfaction and repeat sales in this 


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 102  
instance. Paperless products, such as airline and concert tickets, would however be appropriate, 
as there is no real need for a physical product to be distributed. 
• Finance – even for established businesses promotion in general, and advertising in particular, 
can be very expensive. This might limit the use of the marketing mix to areas which can be 
demonstrated as cost effective. 
Competitive advantage 
Based on the above factors the business will balance the marketing mix components to allow it to 
establish an advantage over its competitors. This might mean a lower price, a better product or a good 
special offer. Advertising products when rivals are not may result in more potential customers being 
made aware of a firm’s products, who then may be tempted to purchase them too! 
 
Competitive advantage in action: 
 
• Business finds out what their competitive advantage is – this could be unique product or feature – 
only Ford Cars have heated front windscreens. It could also be a cheaper price because they have 
access to cheap raw materials, or in the case of Ford they have legal protection on the heated 
windscreen. 
• Decision made – a business may choose to continue to use its current competitive advantage or may 
look to change it. A successful marketing campaign such the Go Compare singing adverts were used 
successfully and then dropped as the company wanted a new type of promotion to be used. This 
was less successful in making its name memorable compared to other price comparison sites, so the 
singer returned …in a taxi! 
 
There will always be constant change in the environment in which the business operates. If a business is 
going to continue to be successful and remain competitive over rivals, its marketing mix must be flexible 
to effectively adapt to these changes and must be fully integrated to ensure that each part of it 
complements the others. 
 
 
  


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 103
