2.5 Human Resource Decisions 
Topic overview 
Although this is a separate topic, students need to relate these concepts to the contexts in which a large 
or growing business will be operating. Students must now be aware of the national and international 
business environment and how this might impact on a firm. Students must be aware of this topic’s 
relationship with the other topics in this theme and how this might affect business decision-making. 
 
Section Key Things to Learn 
Organisational structures Different organisation structures and their use 
Achieving effective communication 
Different ways of working 
Effective recruitment Different job roles and responsibilities 
The recruitment process 
Effective training and 
development 
Methods of training and development 
Purposes of training and development 
Motivation The importance of motivating employees 
Methods of motivation: financial and non-financial 
 
Organisational structures 
As businesses grow in size and the number of employees increases, they will need an internal structure 
to show the relationship between employees, managers, departments and locations. The chosen 
structure will depend on the type of business and its characteristics. Factors such as cost, control and 
communication will all influence the most suitable organisational structure for a particular business.  
Organisation charts 
The simplest way to show how a business is organised is to look at an organisation chart.  This shows 
the management hierarchy in a business and works from top to bottom. Here is an example of an 
organisational chart: 
 



===== PDF PAGE 126 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 125  
As can be seen, the business is arranged into different levels i.e. a hierarchy. Roles are identified and 
lines of management and responsibility are clearly shown. The Managing Director is at the top of the 
organisational structure and he/she has four people reporting directly to him i.e. the different directors. 
The Marketing Director has the different marketing managers reporting into him/her and the sales 
teams will then report into the marketing managers.  
Key job roles and responsibilities 
A large business will have employees at many different levels of the organisational hierarchy. With the 
exception of those employees at the bottom of the structure, these employees will have various 
management responsibilities including being in charge of the layer below them in the organisational 
structure. There are many different roles that can be found in a business. The key roles are summarised 
here: 
• Directors – in a large company, a director will be in charge of a department of functional area, 
for example the Finance Director. They will be part of the Board of Directors who manage the 
company. The most senior director will be the Managing Director. 
• Managers or senior managers – managers will be responsible for a significant part of the 
business operation and will be in charge of the performance of a number of employees. 
• Team leaders or supervisors – in a large business teams of workers will often have one person 
who is more senior. As well as working as part of the team, they will have some responsibilities 
in making sure that the team operates effectively. 
• Operational staff – these are the employees who directly do the work, such as the 
manufacturing or providing the service. 
• Support staff – alongside the operational hierarchy of the business, there be some employees 
who are called on to assist in any area of the organisation. They generally have specialist 
knowledge or skills.  IT support staff are a good example, but this may include less specialist 
roles, such as cleaning, catering and caretaking staff. 
Span of control 
One of the features of an organisation chart is it shows the span of control. Span of control is the 
number of employees for whom a manager is directly responsible.  The two diagrams below illustrate 
two different spans of control: 
 
A span of control of 7 would be considered to be quite wide. Contrast this with a span of 3 below, which 
would be considered narrow. 



===== PDF PAGE 127 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 126  
 
There is no ideal span of control as it will depend upon a number of factors such as: 
• The experience and personality of the manager 
• The type of business - if being a line manager requires a great deal of close supervision, then a 
narrow span might be appropriate 
• The skills and attitudes of the employees – if employees are highly motivated, highly skilled and 
highly qualified, then adopting wide spans of control could be more suitable 
A flat organisational structure will have a wider span of control, compared to a tall hierarchical 
structure, which will have a narrow span of control. As there will be less layers of management in the 
hierarchy, a wider span of control tends to save money for an organisation. There are also benefits, as 
communication will be easier from the top to the bottom of the organisation, but there could be less 
control in terms of managing the quality of work. 
Chains of command 
The chain of command in an organisation chart, shows the lines of authority within the business.  In the 
example below, Sam is responsible for Eve, Chris and Brenda. Further down the chain, Brenda is 
responsible for Sharon and Dawn. This means that Sam would directly communicate with his three 
subordinates. Brenda would then pass on any relevant messages to her team, as she would be their line 
manager. Any issues that Sharon and Dawn may have should be directly communicated to Brenda, 
rather than these two members of staff communicating with Eve, Chris or even missing a layer and 
going directly to Sam. If Sharon or Dawn, had a particular concern regarding Brenda however, they 
could directly communicate with Sam, as he is ultimately in charge of everybody. 
 
If a business has a wide span of control and very few layers in the hierarchy, there will be a short chain 
of command and with a narrow span of control, there is a long chain of command. 



===== PDF PAGE 128 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 127  
Choice of organisational structure 
There are various ways of arranging the business organisational structure. These are often summarised 
as: 
• Flat: the organisational structure has few layers from the top of the organisation to the bottom 
of it, short chains of command and wide spans of control 
• Hierarchical or tall: the organisational structure has many layers from the top of the 
organisation to the bottom of it, long chains of command and narrow spans of control 
 
In the diagram, the hierarchical or tall organisation has six layers and narrow spans of control. In 
contrast, the flat organisation has four layers and wider spans of control. The choice of which is most 
suitable will depend on the nature of the business and the situation in which it operates.  
When a business grows, it becomes more difficult to control, co-ordinate and organise. Therefore in 
some cases, it might be necessary to add in additional managerial positions into the hierarchy, creating 
another layer in the organisation.  
In reverse, if a business is decreasing in size or aiming just to reduce costs, it may well decide to take out 
a layer of management. This process is known as delayering. Delayering may help to improve 
communication within the business, although it will also reduce promotion opportunities, as a layer of 
management has now been removed. This may impact on motivation levels, as well as the fact that staff 
will be expected to take on more responsibility, which may increase the costs of the business through 
increased levels of training. 
Centralisation and decentralisation 
One of the issues that a business needs to address is where decision-making power is in the 
organisational structure. The key question is whether it is kept with senior management at the 
headquarters or the top of the organisation (centralised) or whether it is delegated further down the 
hierarchy, away from the centre and possibly in different locations (decentralised). 



===== PDF PAGE 129 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 128  
Most large businesses do use some decentralisation, especially if they operate from several locations or 
have added new products or markets. The issue is really how much independence business units or 
groups within a business should have when it comes to key decisions, especially those that might affect 
the business as a whole. 
Centralised structures 
Businesses that have a centralised structure keep decision-making firmly at the top of the hierarchy, 
amongst the most senior management.  
Fast-food businesses use a predominantly centralised structure to ensure that control is maintained 
over their many thousands of outlets.  The need to ensure consistency of customer experience and 
quality at every location are the main reasons why centralisation is chosen. 
The main advantages and disadvantages of centralisation are: 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Easier to implement common policies and 
practices for the business as a whole 
 There are often more layers in the 
organisation, which will increase costs  
 Prevents other parts of the business from 
becoming too independent 
 Local or junior managers are likely to be 
much closer to customer needs, therefore 
the best decisions for the local area may 
not be taken by the business 
 Easier to co-ordinate and control from the 
centre, for example with budgets, which 
prevents overspending 
 Lack of authority down the hierarchy may 
reduce manager motivation 
 Economies of scale and other savings are 
easier to achieve; for example, all 
purchasing may be done centrally, which 
will mean cheaper unit costs due to bulk 
purchasing 
 Customer service does not benefit from 
flexibility and speed in local decision-
making 
 Greater use of specialist staff, for example 
in areas such as human resources, finance 
and marketing 
 
 Quicker decision-making (usually) and 
easier to show strong leadership 
 
Decentralised structures 
In a decentralised structure, decision-making is spread out to include more junior managers in the 
hierarchy, as well as individual business units, such as specific stores, or trading locations. 
Good examples of businesses which use a decentralised structure include the major supermarket 
chains. Each supermarket has a store manager who can make specific decisions about their particular 
store, such as staffing levels. However, bigger decisions regarding store layout are made by head office. 
In this instance, every store manager is responsible to a regional or area manager. Hotel chains are also 
particularly keen on using decentralised structures, so that local hotel managers are empowered to 
make on-the-spot decisions to handle customer problems or complaints.  
The main advantages and disadvantages of using decentralisation are: 


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 129  
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Decisions are made closer to the customer 
and therefore are more likely to reflect 
their specific needs 
 Decision-making is not necessarily looking 
to the long term future direction of the 
business 
 Better able to respond to local 
circumstances 
 More difficult to ensure consistent 
practices and policies, customers might 
prefer consistency from location to 
location 
 Improved level of customer service  May be some diseconomies of scale and 
inefficiencies across the business, for 
example staff may duplicate roles across 
different sites 
 Consistent with aiming for a flatter 
hierarchy and organisational structure 
 Nobody to provide quick and strong 
leadership when needed, for example in a 
crisis situation 
 Good way of training and developing junior 
management 
 Harder to control costs, which means the 
business may end up over-spending  
 Should improve staff motivation  
Centralised structures allow for easy communication, particularly from the top of the hierarchy 
downwards. If there is a tall hierarchical structure with many layers, it is harder for employees to 
communicate upwards than it is for managers to communicate downwards, which is explained in 
further depth in the next section. 
Decentralised organisations, particularly those on different sites, find that communication is more 
difficult. If the locations are in different countries then oral communication can be particularly hard to 
achieve, particularly if they are not in the same time zones. Electronic communication, such as emails, is 
often most effective here, although there is a danger of email overload and that some emails will not be 
read and therefore not actioned.  
In large multi-location businesses, there may even be a communication department which has the 
responsibility to make sure that communication methods used by the business are appropriate and 
effective. 
Effective communication  
There is a strong link between the organisational structure and the effectiveness of the methods used 
for internal communication within a business. These can be compared between flat and hierarchical 
organisational structures, as well as centralised and decentralised organisational structures. 
Consideration should also be given as to how communication works up and down the organisation. 
There are two types of communication that are considered here: 
Written communication: letters, memos, emails, reports.  
These are likely to increase in quantity, as the size of the organisation increases. In a tall hierarchical 
structure, written communication from top to bottom of a chain of command is likely to be slow. It is 
also likely to be used greatly. Even email can produce a large quantity of communication in order to 
keep layers of the organisation informed. Communication up the organisation is very difficult. The layers 


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 130  
act as a “filter” preventing messages getting to the higher levels. In a flat structure, communication is 
therefore quicker and easier, due to less layers being in existence.  
Mass communication techniques can also be effective, whatever type of organisational structure that is 
in place, for example a letter sent from the managing director can be sent to all staff. This ensures that 
the message sent is consistent.  
Oral (verbal) communication: face to face, telephone.  
Within tall, hierarchical organisations, verbal messages can get distorted or lost. Communication may be 
slow, as there is no one to receive a message. This means that messages have to be left and may not be 
received. With flat organisations, the personal contact can be motivating for subordinates and 
informing for managers. Upwards communication is much easier in a flat organisation, due to there 
being less layers in the hierarchy.  
Barriers to communication 
Different organisational structures will have strengths and potential weaknesses related to the use of 
communication: 
• Centralised structures allow for easy communication, particularly from the top of the hierarchy 
downwards.  
• Decentralised organisations, particularly those on different sites, find that communication is 
more difficult.  
• In large multi-location businesses, there may be a need for a communication department to 
ensure that communication methods used by the business are appropriate and effective. 
• If there is tall, hierarchical structure with many layers it is harder for employees to communicate 
upwards, than it is for managers to communicate downwards, as previously mentioned. 
Aiming to achieve effective communication is one thing – actually doing it is another. There are several 
barriers to communication, including: 
Barrier Explanation 
Language The message might use vocabulary that is not understood by the receiver, for example 
too much use of technical or financial jargon. In some cases, messages may be from 
different countries and therefore be written in different languages. 
Noise Various things stop a message from getting through or being heard, for example poor 
connection, background noise, distractions, too many people speaking at once. This can 
be the case in open plan offices, where large volumes of people work in one room to 
encourage socialisation and openness. However, this can also create distractions and 
lots of noise! 
Overload Too much information can cause problems, for example slow down decision-making. 
Employees will often get too many communications, some of which will be important, 
some urgent and some not requiring any attention. E-mails have made the overload 
situation worse for many workers, as sometimes a receiver may receive over 100 a day! 


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 131  
Barrier Explanation 
Emotion The relationship between the sender and receiver of communication might adversely 
affect the message. Emotions are difficult to read, particularly in emails, and as a result 
the message could be ignored or misinterpreted. 
Gaps Too many intermediaries, for example too many layers in the hierarchy through which a 
message has to be passed, might prevent or distort the message. 
Inconsistency If people receive conflicting or inconsistent messages, then they may ignore or block 
them and therefore important actions may not take place. 
The impact of insufficient or excessive communication 
Two of the most common complaints about communication is that there is too little or too much! 
Insufficient communication can often lead to poor motivation, as workers believe they are not 
important parts of the organisation. This can also lead to failure to complete jobs, as employees are not 
fully aware of the job’s requirements. Alternatively, employees complete the job, but not correctly as 
they do not have all the required details in order to complete it successfully. 
Equally too much communication can also lead to workers being ineffective or inefficient. Excessive 
communication can mean unnecessary work acknowledging and responding to the communications. 
This can slow down the worker’s output. It can also cause quality issues, if the communication keeps 
changing the job requirements or contradicts other communications that have been received. 
Motivation is best when communication is clear and sufficient.  
Different ways of working 
Nowadays, there are many different ways of working – in fact more than there has even been! These 
should be considered from both the employee and employers point of views. In some cases, these will 
match, whereas in others the interest of the business may not allow the employee to work in a 
particular way, for example full-time versus part-time positions. Some of the more common types of 
working arrangements are summarised below:  
Permanent 
contracts 
These provide the most certainty for the employee, but are less flexible for the 
business. Employees have to be given a contract which gives details of pay, 
holiday, hours of work, notice requirements and codes of behaviour. All of these 
must conform to employee law. As workers will be secure in their job, they may 
be better motivated and productivity levels may rise. 
Temporary 
contracts 
Temporary contracts are normally for a fixed period of time. This will be suitable 
for businesses where they may have a particular contract with no guaranteed or 
similar work to follow. It can also be used as a trial period for workers. From the 
employee’s point of view, it does not offer job security and can therefore make it 
difficult to get a mortgage to buy a house for example. 
Freelance contracts These are similar to temporary workers, only normally the freelance employee is 
hired on a daily basis or just for a specific job. This is very common in some 
industries, such as the music performance industry where freelance musicians will 
be employed for a particular concert or tour. This provides flexibility for the 


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 132  
business, but no guarantee that the chosen worker will be available and therefore 
the business may not have sufficient workers to carry out a particular task. It also 
provides no job security for the employee, who may seek to find more secure 
work elsewhere. 
Full-time contracts Workers will generally have to work 5 days a week and no more than 48 hours 
(although many will work far less). Having full-time workers will give workers 
consistency in the workplace, for example relationships with customers and will 
provide the employees with a guaranteed wage that they should be able to live 
on. 
Part-time contracts Part-time workers have the same rights as full-time workers, although 
entitlements such as holidays are reduced in line with the amount of part-time 
hours worked. These provide a smaller amount of work for employees compared 
to full-time, which the member of staff may prefer, particularly if they have other 
commitments such as childcare. It will also give the business more flexibility to 
increase the part-time hours of a worker, if the business becomes busier for a 
period of time.  
Flexible or zero- 
hour contracts 
This type of contract provides no guarantee of any hours. The worker may have to 
be available for work, but is not guaranteed any. This gives employers maximum 
flexibility and is much used in catering, farming and the health service. Some 
employees like the flexibility, for example students and mothers with young 
children, but for others it makes planning family income very difficult. 
 
Technology and working from home - remote working 
The widespread adoption of low-cost, easy-to-use information technology means that many 
entrepreneurs now start and operate their businesses from home. Large businesses have also seen 
advantages in allowing their employees to work at home, for either some or all of their hours.  
Having employees as remote workers will have advantages and disadvantages. In some cases these will 
be to the worker, in other cases to the business. This works best when it benefits both the business and 
the employee and in these cases it should increase business efficiency. 
  


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 133  
 
Advantages Disadvantages 
 Cheap – the business does not need to 
provide premises for the workers. 
 Employees require greater self-discipline – it 
is easy to get distracted! 
 Very little travelling, although customers 
and suppliers might still need to be 
visited. 
 Work is often interrupted, for example by 
callers to the home or by family. 
 Work can be combined with domestic 
tasks and responsibilities, for example 
child care.  This can mean significant cost 
savings for the employee and can also 
allow businesses to retain valued 
workers. 
 Work never goes away – it is difficult to 
separate work from home life, which can 
increase stress levels! 
 Environmental benefits - lower carbon 
footprint. 
 Potentially lonely for the employee – this 
may lead to a lack of motivation, as there is 
no social interaction from colleagues. 
 More flexible hours might be possible, as 
workers may prefer to work early or late 
to fit in with other commitments.  
 More difficult for the business to monitor 
and control work being undertaken. 
 
Effective recruitment  
Recruitment and selection is a process that involves: 
• Identifying the need for a job 
• Defining the requirements of the position and the job holder 
• Advertising the position 
• Choosing the most appropriate person for the job 
Recruitment is a vitally important activity for a business of any size. Indeed, the success of any business 
depends to a large extent on the quality of its staff.  Recruiting employees with the correct skills can add 
value to a business and recruiting workers at a wage or salary that the business can afford, will reduce 
costs.  Employees should therefore be carefully selected, managed and retained, just like any other 
resource. 


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 134  
 
Job analysis 
When a vacancy arises in an organisation, perhaps due to somebody leaving a position for a job in 
another firm, the organisation will need to decide whether the job is still really required, before starting 
the actual recruitment process itself. This stage is called the job analysis.  
Many small businesses have only one worker and many large businesses do not replace workers if they 
leave. If the business decides that there is a vacant position, the next stage of the job analysis process is 
to decide what type of worker is needed. In order to help this process, the key documents of a job 
description and a person specification will be produced.  
Key documents 
Job description 
• A detailed explanation of the roles and responsibilities of the post advertised 
• Most applicants will ask for this before applying for the job – they want to know what the job 
will involve! Making sure this is sufficiently detailed, will make the recruitment process much 
more efficient for the organisation, as it will help to prevent unsuitable candidates applying for 
vacant positions  
• Refers to the post available, rather than the specific type of person the organisation is looking 
for 
Person specification 
• Sets out the kind of qualifications, skills, experience and personal attributes a successful 
candidate should possess 
• A vital tool in comparing and assessing the suitability of job applicants 
• Refers to the person rather than the post 
Internal and external recruitment 



===== PDF PAGE 136 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 135  
When looking for people to fill a vacancy that has arisen, the business may already have employees in 
the organisation who would be suitable. This is known as internal recruitment. If there are no suitable 
internal candidates, then the business will need applicants from outside of the firm. This is known as 
external recruitment. Of course both internal and external recruitment can be used. This is often the 
case for senior management appointments. 
The most popular ways of recruiting externally are:   
• Job centres – Government agencies to help the unemployed find jobs or get training 
• Job advertisements - the most common form of external recruitment.  Where a business 
chooses to advertise will depend on the cost of advertising and the coverage needed i.e. how far 
away people will consider applying for the job 
• Recruitment agency - provides employers with details of suitable candidates for a vacancy and 
can sometimes be referred to as “head-hunters”.  They work for a fee and often specialise in 
particular employment areas, for example nursing, financial services, teacher recruitment 
• Personal recommendation - often referred to as “word of mouth” and can be a 
recommendation from a colleague at work.  A full assessment of the candidate is still needed 
however, but potentially it saves on advertising costs 
• Websites – these include general sites such as Fish4Jobs and MonsterJobs. Most agencies and 
major employers will also have their own websites with a specific link to current vacancies. In 
addition, there will be vacancy websites related to particular professions. Examples include 
farming, nursing and teaching 
Internal versus external recruitment 
The benefits and drawbacks of internal and external recruitment include the following: 
  


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 136  
 
 Benefits Drawbacks 
Internal 
recruitment  
 Cheaper and quicker to recruit and 
fill the vacancy 
 Limits the number of potential 
applicants  
 People already familiar with the 
business and how it operates, 
therefore productivity increases 
quicker  
 No new ideas can be introduced 
from outside  
 Provides opportunities for 
promotion within the business, 
which could lead to increased 
employee motivation levels and 
higher staff retention 
 May cause resentment amongst 
candidates not appointed  
 Business already knows the 
strengths and weaknesses of the 
candidate, which results in less risk 
in the recruitment process 
 Creates another vacancy which 
needs to be filled  
External 
recruitment  
 Outside people bring in new ideas   Longer process  
 Larger pool of workers from which 
to find the best candidate  
 More expensive process, due to 
advertising and interviews 
required  
 People have a wider range of 
experience  
 Selection process may not be 
effective enough to reveal the best 
candidate  
 
Application process 
The most suitable methods of selecting new employees will very much depend on the type of job and 
the sort of person that is required. Using the wrong method might mean recruiting an unsuitable 
worker or missing the best candidate for the position. The business must also take into account the legal 
restrictions on recruitment, such as laws banning most types of discrimination. 
When recruiting externally, the business will almost certainly have to produce a job advertisement.  The 
objectives of the advertisement are to: 
• Inform the audience of potential candidates about the vacancy  
• Provide enough information to both inform and interest possible applicants 
• Help filter out unsuitable applicants 
• Obtain the most number of suitably qualified applicants for the post advertised 
The advertisement must not discriminate and should provide details of how to apply for the vacancy.  


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 137  
For many jobs, a business will ask applicants to provide a curriculum vitae (CV).  This is a document that 
the applicant designs providing details such as:   
Personal details Name, address, nationality, national insurance number 
Educational history  Including examination results, schools/universities attended, 
professional qualifications  
Previous employment history  Names of employers, position held, main achievements, 
remuneration package, reasons for leaving  
Suitability and reasons for 
applying for the job  
A chance for applicants to “sell themselves” 
Names of referees  Often is a recent employer or a person who knows the applicant well 
and are ideally independent and therefore non-biased 
Sometimes job applicants are asked to fill in a firm’s own application form.  This is different from a CV in 
that the employer designs it and sends it to applicants, but it will still ask for much of the same 
information.  It has the benefit over a CV in that a business is able to design the form to its exact needs 
and ask specific questions that it feels are important to help it select the best candidate for the vacant 
position. Increasingly application forms are completed online. 
Once a business has received all the applications, they need to be analysed and the most appropriate 
candidates identified. This process is known as short listing. The short listed applicants will then 
normally be invited to the business for further selection tests or interviews. From this selection process, 
the most suited candidate for the vacant position will be chosen and an offer letter will be sent to the 
candidate. If this candidate agrees to take up the post, the new employee must be given an 
employment contract once he/she has started work. This is an important legal document that describes 
the obligations of the employee and employer to each other (terms and conditions), as well as the initial 
remuneration package and a number of other important details.  
Recruiting the best staff is one of the most important decisions that businesses make. They produce 
many benefits for the business, as well as providing value for money. Some of the benefits to the 
business are: 
 Increase in output and productivity which makes a business more efficient, leading to lower 
average unit costs and potentially higher profits. The new member of staff will enjoy his/her new 
position and be motivated to work hard! 
 Different ideas that increase the success in terms of new products or just new ways of doing 
things 
 Improvements in quality and customer service that means the business gains new customers or 
repeat business from existing customers 
 Increase in staff retention as the right person is appointed for the position in the first place. 
Therefore, they are unlikely to leave because they have taken on the “wrong” job and therefore 
do not like either the job itself, the business or both! 
  


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 138  
Effective training and development 
All businesses will need to train their staff. New staff will need to know how the business operates and 
how to do their job well, whereas existing staff will need to be trained in new processes or on new 
equipment. Some staff may require further training, so they can take on more advanced or difficult jobs 
in the future.  
Training can be defined as: 
The process of increasing the knowledge and skills of the workforce to enable them to perform their 
jobs effectively 
Training costs can be significant in any business. Many employers are prepared to pay these costs 
because they expect their business to benefit from employees' development and progress. 
Methods of training  
Training can take place in many different ways. These can be formal or informal and be organised 
through self-learning programmes or external organisations, as well as being provided at the place of 
work. In large organisations, training and development is part of the performance review process, which 
will recommend what training is required and how it can be arranged for each individual in the 
organisation. 
Type of training Description 
Formal This often takes place outside the workplace at colleges, training organisations or 
other similar provider premises. Training outside of the place of work is otherwise 
known as “off the job” training. 
 This allows the employee to concentrate on the training provided and to 
receive specialist training from expert providers.  
 It can however, be more expensive than training provided “in house” or at the 
place of work by other employees, as it means that for existing workers, they 
will not be carrying out their normal work. 
Informal This normally takes place at the workplace and is often based on observation or 
being “shown how to do a particular job” by a colleague who already does the 
same job. This is otherwise known as “on the job” training.  
 This can be much cheaper than formal training, as it is provided by existing 
employees and no specialist trainers have to be paid. 
 It may result in the employee being trained by copying poor practice, rather 
than learning from scratch the best way of doing a specific job. 
Self-learning The widespread use of the internet means that training can often take place at 
home, linked to online tests, to ensure that the training has been understood. 
 Some self-motivated workers and some types of training work well through 
this method. It can be cheaper, as travelling costs are reduced. 


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 139  
Type of training Description 
 It is not suitable for all employees or all types of jobs. It is also reliant on the 
employee carrying out the training independently. In this case, not all aspects 
of the training may be understood and two way dialogue cannot be 
established to clarify specific points. 
Ongoing training As the pace of change is so rapid, businesses generally have a culture of 
continuous learning for all their employees. The choice of training to be 
undertaken may be management or employee driven.  
Performance 
reviews or 
appraisal 
Performance reviews are part of most big business operations and are normally 
linked to a target setting and an annual review process. This is where an employee 
usually has a meeting with his/her line manager to discuss the employee’s 
performance over the last year. Based on this review, targets are set for the future 
and training organised. This may be in the form of remedial or refresher training 
where poor performance has been identified. Better performance may lead to 
development training, so that the employee will be able to take on new or more 
senior roles within the business in the future. 
Choice of training method 
There are many factors that will affect the method or methods of training that a business will use. These 
include the type of job, for example, airline pilots would not start learning using on the job training, but 
would need significant off the job training before actually being allowed to fly a plane! 
Other factors a business would need to consider in their choice of training would be the firm’s budget 
and time available, whether the business has the capability of delivering its own training, for example 
trainers, rooms and equipment. Most importantly a firm would need to review carefully the needs of 
the workers who need to be trained and put in place the most appropriate training package that suits 
them!  
Benefits of training and development 
Effective training and development has the potential to provide a range of benefits for a business: 
 Higher quality – workers know how to do the job and will make less mistakes 
 Better levels of customer service are provided to customers – knowledge and skills of employees 
will be increased 
 Increased productivity – employees will know the best way of doing their work, increasing their 
overall efficiency 
 Improved motivation -  workers feel valued, so will work better and harder 
 Less supervision is required, as workers are more motivated and loyal to the business 
 More flexibility through better and new skills, which also allows use of new technology 
 Easier to recruit and employee retention will be higher – staff are happy and want to work for a 
business that cares; this reduces recruitment and selection costs which can be high and a very 
time consuming process 
 Easier to implement change in the business 
 


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 140  
It should be noted that training also benefits the employee. In some cases this will be the same benefit 
as for the business, but not always. A well trained worker may be able to be promoted internally in a 
business to a higher position in the organisational structure or gain a better job at another business. 
Retraining to use new technology 
As new technology is introduced into a business then employees will need training on how to use it. It is 
generally cheaper to retain and retrain existing staff rather than replace them with new employees. As 
well as management directing employees to training for new technology, their training needs can also 
be identified as part of the appraisal or performance review process.  
Methods of training for new technology can include formal training provided by the supplier of the new 
technology. This is quite common for new ICT packages and equipment. There can also be cascade type 
methods, where one employee is sent on a training course and then trains colleagues on their return. 
All training will cost money, this might be a direct charge for a course or the cost might be included in 
the purchase of the new technology equipment. There can also be indirect costs such as covering for 
employee’s who are absent from work because they are being trained. 
The benefits of the training are normally significant. By introducing new technology, there may be the 
need for less employees, but it is important that all employees are able to use new technology 
efficiently. Well trained staff will also ensure that quality is maintained or improved and this can lead to 
products that are cheaper to produce and more competitively priced, as well as being of good quality.  
Motivation 
Having recruited the right workforce, a business needs to make sure they continue to work at the 
highest possible standards for as long as possible. There are many ways of motivating a workforce so 
that this happens. The success of the methods will depend on the type of the business and the 
circumstances in which it is operating. 
What is motivation? 
Motivation is essentially about the commitment to doing something.  In the context of a business, 
motivation can be said to relate to:  
“the will to work” 
However, motivation is about more than simply working hard or completing tasks. People in business 
can find motivation from a variety of sources. 
Motivation can come from the enjoyment of the work itself and/or from the desire to achieve certain 
goals, for example earn more money or achieve promotion. It can also come from the sense of 
satisfaction gained from completing a specific problem or achieving a successful outcome after a 
difficult project. 
Motivation is important as people’s behaviour is determined by what motivates them. The performance 
of employees is a product of both their abilities, for example their skills and experience, and their 
motivation levels.  A talented employee who feels de-motivated is unlikely to perform well at work, but 
a motivated employee can often deliver far more than is expected from them! 
Benefits of a well-motivated workforce 
A well-motivated workforce can provide several advantages to a business: 


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 141  
 High productivity (amount produced per employee).  This can lead to lower average unit costs of 
production, as the firm’s fixed costs will be spread across more units, and enables a firm to sell 
its products at a lower price or benefit from receiving higher profit margins on each item sold 
 Low levels of absenteeism as the employees are content with their working lives and will 
therefore motivate themselves to attend work, even if they feel “under the weather!” 
 High levels of staff retention and low levels of staff turnover (the number of employees leaving 
the business).  This can lead to lower training and recruitment costs 
 Improved industrial relations with trade unions. The relationship between staff and 
management is strong 
 Contented workers give the firm a good reputation as an employer, therefore making it easier to 
recruit the best workers in the future 
 Motivated employees are likely to improve product quality or the customer service associated 
with a product, as they want to do the best job that they can, as they really care about the 
quality of their work 
Financial methods of motivation 
There are many reasons why people work for a living, although money or other financial rewards play a 
key role in motivating people in the workplace. 
There are a wide variety of ways in which a business can offer money, or financial rewards, as part of 
the pay package. In many cases, an employee may benefit from a mixture of these financial rewards 
which can include: 
• Salaries: fixed amounts paid each month for performing a role; these are common for most 
managerial positions, for example an accountant, teacher 
• Wage: pay based on time worked; very common in small businesses or in retail stores where 
employees are paid by the hour 
• Piece-rate pay: pay per item produced, for example used in fruit picking 
• Commission: payment based on the value of sales achieved. This can sometimes be as a 
percentage of sales. 
• Bonus: extra pay or reward for reaching a target; can be for an individual, a team or a workforce 
• Profit share: staff payments or bonuses are linked to the performance of the firm, may include 
shares for the employees.   
• Promotion: if an employee does well they will get promoted which will give them a higher salary 
• Fringe benefits are benefits in kind that are not paid out directly in cash (or cash equivalents 
such as shares). Examples of these include: company cars, travel and housing subsidies, holidays, 
childcare provision, staff uniforms and staff discounts. The type of fringe benefits that are given 
to employees would be appropriate to the size, nature and finances available within the firm. 
Non-financial methods of motivation 
An entrepreneur or small business owner is in a good position to be able to motivate his/her staff.  The 
business owner is likely to know personally each member of staff and have a close understanding of 
their skills, abilities and attitude at work.  
Larger businesses will use similar methods providing they know their employees and have an 
organisational structure that provides opportunities for non-financial motivation to take place.  
Here are some non-financial ways in which business can keep staff motivated: 


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 142  
• Job enlargement – give staff a greater variety of tasks to perform (not necessarily more 
challenging) which should make the work more interesting.  This often happens anyway in small 
businesses where staff undertake a variety of tasks. This might take place through job rotation, 
which also means staff can undertake more than one job. 
• Job enrichment – this involves workers being given greater responsibility and a wider range of 
more complex and challenging tasks. This should give a greater sense of achievement.  
• Autonomy – employees are given more independence so that they are trusted to work on their 
own and use their own initiative. 


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 143  
Glossary 
 
Term Definition 
Adding value How a business sells a product for more than it costs through the processes 
they apply 
Advertising Promotional method where a business pays to place an advert in a form of 
media, such as a newspaper or television 
Aesthetics The attractiveness of the design of a product 
Aims and objectives The overall goals of a business or organisation identifying what the business is 
trying to achieve 
Application form A method of applying for a job where the required details are decided by the 
business who is recruiting 
Autonomy The independence a worker has within their job 
Average rate of 
return 
The annual percentage profit that an investment makes compared to the cost of 
the investment 
Bar gate stock 
control graph 
A method of displaying data on stock levels, which allows stock control policy to 
be decided, implemented and reviewed within a business 
Batch production Method of production where groups or types of products are made at several 
stages 
Bonus An extra amount of financial pay received through achieving a business target  
Branding What distinguishes a good or service from rivals 
Break even Where total revenue is the same as total costs and no profit or loss is made 
Buffer stock A quantity of stock kept in store to safeguard against unforeseen shortages or 
demands 
Business An organisation set up to meet customer demand and to make a profit for its 
owners 
Business 
environment 
The external factors such as the economy and the law that influence how a 
business operates 
Business plan A document produced by a new or existing business that shows what its 
objectives are and how it will meet them 
Capacity The maximum production output a business can achieve with its existing 
resources 
Capital The initial money that is needed to start a business that is normally linked to 
purchases of machinery and premises 
Cash-flow The money that flows into and out of a business 
Cash-flow forecast The prediction of how much money will come into and out of a business over a 
future time period 
Cash inflow The money that comes into a business from sales and other sources 
Cash outflow The money leaving a business that it spends on raw materials, labour and other 
expenses 
Centralised Where business decision making and implementation take place at and from 


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 144  
Term Definition 
the business headquarters 
Chain of command Part of the structure of a business organisation which shows who is in charge of 
who 
Closing balance The total cash-flow left at the end of a period 
Commission The extra amount of pay workers receive as a percentage of their or the 
business’s sales 
Communication How messages are passed within a business or from a business to its customers 
Competition Other businesses that produce the same or similar goods or services 
Competitive 
advantage 
A business has a marketing mix which enables it to be more successful than its 
competitors 
Competitive 
environment 
The number and strength of other businesses in the same market 
Competitive pricing Where the price of a product is decided by comparing it to its rivals 
Consumer The person or business that use the good or service produced 
Consumer income How much money consumers have to spend on their needs and wants 
Consumer law Legal constraints that protect the consumer from unfair business practice 
Consumer Rights Where consumers are protected by laws in terms of product quality, returning 
goods, repairs and replacements, digital content and delivery 
Consumer spending The level of spending that consumers undertake related to their income 
Cost plus A pricing method where a business decides what price to charge based only on 
the cost of its production and some extra to make a profit 
Crowd funding Finance raised through internet appeals from a large number of small investors 
Curriculum Vitae A document summarising the personal details, qualifications and experiences of 
an individual. Often used to apply for a job 
Customer 
engagement 
Communicating with customers in a positive way 
Customer feedback Enquiries made after a sale to show how a good, a service or the sales process 
could be improved 
Customer loyalty Whether customers return to a  business on a regular basis to purchase more of 
the same goods or other goods that they produce 
Customer needs What an individual must have in order to survive 
Customer satisfaction How happy the consumer is with the product or service they have purchased 
Customer service How a business looks after its customers before, during and after they make a 
purchase 
Customers The people who purchase a product or service from a business (not always the 
consumer) 
Decentralised A business structure and its decision-making is spread out to include more 
junior managers as well as individual business units or locations 
Delayering A method of saving costs in an organisation by reducing the number of layers 
Demographics Factors related to population, often used as a basis for segmentation 


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 145  
Term Definition 
Design mix The use, appearance and cost of a product 
Differentiation When a business makes its product different to those of its competitors 
Digital 
communication 
Sending messages using mobile or internet technology 
Digital technology Where businesses use computers in any way to improve their business 
performance 
Directors People appointed by the shareholders to run the company on a day-to-day basis 
to make all the important decisions 
Discrimination When an employer choses its workers based on a particular characteristic; many 
of these are illegal, for example age, gender and race 
Distribution How a product gets from the producer to the consumer 
Dividend The share of the profit received by a shareholder 
E-commerce Using the internet to promote and sell a good or service 
Economic climate How a business is affected by economic variables such as interest rates or 
inflation in a country or in other countries 
Efficiency Measures of how much output is being produced per unit of input 
Employees People who work within a business 
Employment law Legal constraints that protect the employees of a business from unfair business 
practice  
Employment level The % employment rate in a country which will effect consumer spending and 
the availability of employees 
E-newsletter A regular publication sent electronically to customers with items of interest, 
new products and promotions; used to maintain regular contact with customers 
Enterprise A business that has the objective of making a profit 
Entrepreneur An individual who takes a calculated risk in starting or running a business in 
return for making a profit 
Environmental 
considerations 
The business takes into account consumer and producer concerns about the 
environment 
E-tailer An electronic retailer i.e. sells goods using the internet 
Ethical objectives Where businesses have as an aim what is morally right rather than necessarily 
the most profitable option 
Excessive 
communication 
When too much communication can lead to workers being ineffective or 
inefficient because of unnecessary work acknowledging and responding to 
communications 
Exchange rate The amount of foreign currency that can be purchased with another currency 
Exports Goods or services that are produced in this country and sold to other countries 
Extension strategy Methods of prolonging the product life cycle to extend the life of a product 
External finance Sources of money from outside of a business 
External growth Growth which occurs by a merging with or taking over another business 
External influence Factors that affect a business but they cannot control 


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 146  
Term Definition 
External recruitment Where a business aims to finds new workers from outside of its current 
workforce 
Finance The money that is necessary to start and run a business  
Financial data Information on the costs and revenues of businesses showing changes over time 
and used as the basis for calculations and displaying to managers 
Financial objectives Quantifiable targets for a business including profit, sales and costs 
Fixed costs Business costs that do not vary with output 
Fixed premises Where business premises are located in a building; the use has decreased with 
the rise of the  internet increasing home or teleworking 
Flat structure Where the organisational structure has few layers, short chains of command 
and wide spans of control 
Flexible hours Either the employee or the employer have some choice about the actual hours 
worked 
Flow production Method of production associated with making very large quantities of standard 
products 
Focus group In depth market research where discussions take place with a group of potential 
of actual consumers 
Formal training Specialist training for employees involving courses or off site provision 
Franchise Where a business acquires the right to use the name and products of another 
business 
Franchisee The business which runs a franchise in a specific territory or area 
Franchisor The seller of a right to operate a franchise 
Freelance contracts Where an employee is available to be hired on a daily basis or just for a specific 
job 
Fringe benefit Methods of rewarding a worker that are not directly monetary 
Full time working An employee who is employed for a whole weeks work 
Function  A feature of product design which shows that the product can perform its 
intended job 
Gap in the market An opportunity for a business to provide a good or service that is not currently 
available 
Globalisation The increased integration of trade, finance and communications between 
countries 
Goods Products that businesses produce that have a physical presence 
Gross profit The difference between revenue and cost of sales; calculated as:  
gross profit = total revenue – cost of sales 
Gross profit margin The percentage profit made on sales not taking into account the businesses 
expenses; calculated as: gross profit/sales revenue x 100 
Growth A business objective of increasing the amount or value of sales 
Health and safety law Legal constraints that protect the employees of a business from unsafe  
business practice 


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 147  
Term Definition 
Hierarchical structure Where the of organisational structure has many layers, long chains of command 
and narrow spans of control 
Human resources How a business recruits and manages its workforce 
Imports Goods or services that are produced in other countries and consumed in this 
country 
Inflation Where costs and prices in an economy are increasing  
Informal training Where employees learn how to do a job at the workplace by observing other 
employees 
Innovation The introduction of a new product or features on a product 
Inorganic growth Growth which occurs by merging with or taking over another business 
Insolvency Where a business runs out of cash and is not able to obtain new finance 
Interest rates The percentage cost of borrowing money or the reward for saving money 
Internal finance Where a business obtains funds from its own sources such as retained profits 
Internal growth Organic growth which takes place through a business selling more of its own 
products 
Internal recruitment Where a business aims to finds new workers from within its current workforce 
Internet A means of connecting computer to computer to allow the transfer of 
information around the world 
Investment The purchase of new premises or machinery which can be used for growth, 
replacement or mechanisation 
Job analysis A business deciding whether it needs a worker and what type if required 
Job description An explanation of the roles and responsibilities of a job 
Job enrichment Giving  workers more responsibility or more complex and challenging tasks so 
they have a sense of achievement 
Job production Method of production where products are made individually 
Job roles What the different types of jobs do in a business 
Job rotation Where a worker moves from one job to another job over a period of time 
Just-in-time Where inputs into the production process arrive on the production line just as 
they are needed 
Labour The workers who are needed directly or indirectly to provide the good or 
service that a business produces 
Lead time The time between ordering a good or service and receiving it 
Legal structure What type of organisation a business chooses to be such as a partnership or 
company 
Limited liability The protection enjoyed by shareholders who can only lose the money they have 
put into the company 
Loan Source of finance for a business where they receive a fixed amount of money 
for a specified time, which will need repayment with interest 
Loan capital Sources of finance involving loans normally from banks or other financial 


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 148  
Term Definition 
institutions 
Local community A business stakeholder who will be affected by a business’s location in terms of 
direct and indirect employment opportunities  
Location The place where a firm decides to conduct its business 
Logistics The management of the flow of goods, information and money along the supply 
chain 
Loss Where the costs of a business are greater than its income 
Loss leader Where a business prices a good at less than its cost to encourage customers to 
buy other goods at the same time 
Management  How to successfully ensure that employees work effectively 
Margin of safety The additional output that a business produces or expects to produce more 
than its breakeven output 
Market conditions The current situation in the economy and whether it is improving or worsening 
Market data Quantitative information such as sales figures over time for the market of a 
product or service 
Market map A diagram representing different businesses in a market that are compared to 
two variables, such as price and quality; it is used to identify a gap in the market 
Market research Information from existing and potential consumers about their reaction to a 
good or service 
Market share The percentage of total sales a firm’s particular good or service has 
Marketing Providing the goods and services that consumers require whilst making a profit 
Marketing mix The ingredients needed to produce a marketing policy normally known as the 
4Ps (product, price, place and promotion) 
Market segments A way of dividing up the market into different groups of potential customers 
Materials The inputs needed for the production of a good or service 
Merger Where two businesses of equal size are joined together 
Motivation The desire of an employee to do a job well 
Multinational A business that produces goods in more than one country 
Needs What an individual must have in order to survive 
Net cash-flow The difference between the cash inflows and cash outflows for a business in a 
time period 
Net profit The total amount of money made from the trading activities of the business; 
calculated as: net profit = gross profit - overheads/expenses 
Net profit margin The percentage profit made after all costs and expenses have been deducted; 
calculated as: net profit/sales revenue x 100 
Non-financial 
objectives 
Business targets that involve areas such as improving quality and being more 
ethical 
Observation A method of market research where direct data is gathered from customer 
actions 
Obsolete When a type of product is no longer produced because it is not needed or has 


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 149  
Term Definition 
been replaced 
Opening balance The total cash-flow available at the start of a period 
Operational staff Employees who directly do the work such as the manufacturing or providing the 
service 
Organic growth Growth which occurs as a business sells more of its own products 
Organisational 
structure 
The way employees are arranged into a formal structure for control and 
communication 
Output The total quantity produced by a business, employee or machine over a given 
period of time 
Overdraft Source of finance for a business where it is allowed to take more money out of 
its account than it has deposited 
Overheads Costs or expenses that a business incurs 
Partnership Where a business is started and owned by more than one person, who then 
share the profits and the responsibilities 
Part-time working Where an employee is employed for less than a whole weeks work 
Payment system The use of digital technology by a business to pay its suppliers and employees 
Performance review A process of staff development looking back at how well an employee is doing 
their job; often linked to identifying future training needs and bonuses 
Permanent contract A job where an employee will continue working for an indefinite period 
Person specification The qualifications, skills, experience and personal attributes needed for a job 
Personal savings The difference between an individual’s income and their spending 
Place How a product or service is distributed to the customer 
Post sales service Following up with a customer after they have made a purchase to check that 
everything is “ok” 
Pressure group A collection of individuals who have a common cause and campaign to achieve 
it 
Price The amount of money a customer would need in order to buy a good or service  
Pricing strategy A policy that a business decides to calculate the price at which it chooses to sell 
its new or existing products 
Primary research First-hand information gathered by a business about existing and potential 
consumers 
Private limited 
company 
The most common kind of limited company in the UK, where shares can only be 
sold to “family and friends” 
Procurement The process of choosing a supplier 
Product life cycle The stages in the life of a product from when it is first thought of until it is finally 
removed from the market 
Product range The amount of different types of goods or services that a business chooses to 
produce 
Product trial A free or reduced price product given as a sample with the hope that consumers 
will continue to buy the product in the future 


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 150  
Term Definition 
Production The process which involves taking inputs and transforming them into outputs 
Productivity The amount of output per unit of input (labour, equipment, and capital) 
Profit The difference between costs and revenue 
Promotion Methods of making a consumer aware of a product and persuading them to buy 
it, includes advertising, sales promotion and public relations 
Promotion (human 
resources) 
Where an employee moves job to a more senior position 
Public limited 
company 
The kind of limited company whose shares can be bought on a recognised stock 
exchange 
Public relations An approach to promoting a business focussed on producing a positive image 
using media and other indirect methods 
Qualitative data Results of research that is based on opinions, attitudes and beliefs  
Quality Where a product is of a standard that meets a customer's requirements 
Quality assurance Setting up processes in production to ensure that quality is achieved 
Quality control Checking that the products produced by a business are of the required standard 
at the end of the production process 
Quantitative data Results of market research that is normally numerical  
Questionnaire A method of gaining market research data through asking the opinions of actual 
or potential customers 
Raw materials The inputs needed for the production of a good or service 
Recruitment A process a business undertakes to attract new or replacement workers 
Reliability Whether a supplier will always deliver at the agreed time 
Remote working Where employees can be working normally at home away from their business’s 
location being linked through the internet 
Remuneration The package of pay and other rewards provided to an employee 
Research and 
development 
Costs that are required in getting a new product ready to launch into a market  
Retailer The final part of the distribution process where the product is sold to the 
customer 
Retained profit A source of finance based on money that a business keeps back after paying 
shareholders a dividend and giving owners their share of the profits 
Retention How well a business keeps the staff that it employs 
Revenue The income from sales; price x quantity sold 
Reward What an entrepreneur receives, financial or non-financial, as the return for the 
risks that are taken 
Risk The possibility that a business may not be successful 
Roles and 
responsibilities 
The details about a job and what it involves 
Sales process A series of activities that are designed to engage customers and to complete a 
sale 


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 151  
Term Definition 
Sales promotion Point of sale methods that persuade customers to buy a product  
Secondary research Information that has already been collected by other businesses or 
organisations about existing and potential consumers 
Segmentation A way of dividing up the market into different groups of potential customers 
Self-learning A method of training and development where the employee works through a 
guided programme of information and activities 
Selling assets When a business sells its land, buildings, machinery or equipment that are no 
longer needed to raise additional finance 
Service Activities that are provided by a business for customers and that are not 
tangible 
Share capital The money raised by a business from the sale of shares 
Share issue When a company raises finance through selling shares to new or existing 
shareholders 
Shareholder An owner of a company who receives a dividend as a return for their investment 
Shares When an investor owns part of a private or public limited company 
Social media Internet sites such as Facebook and Twitter that allow individuals to interact 
through messages and updating 
Social objectives Business objectives such as being ethical or environmentally friendly 
Sole trader Where a business is started and owned by one person who keeps all the profits, 
but holds all the responsibilities 
Sources of finance Options that a business has if it needs additional finance to start, run or expand 
its business 
Span of control The number of employees who a manager directly controls 
Special offers Temporary deals to encourage customers to try a new product or a relaunched 
product 
Sponsorship A type of public relations where a business aims to improve brand awareness 
through making donations to individuals and organisations 
Stakeholder An individual or group that is directly or indirectly affected by the actions of a 
business 
Stock market 
flotation 
When a company raises finance through selling shares to new or existing 
shareholders 
Supervisor An employee with responsibilities for the work produced by a number of 
workers 
Supplier A business that provides raw materials, components, finished goods or services 
in exchange for payment 
Supply chain All activities that are involved in getting a good or service to the customer 
Support staff Employees who are called onto assist in any area of the organisation by 
providing additional labour or specialist skills 
Survey A method of market research where customers and potential customers are 
asked their opinions 


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====
Edexcel GCSE Business (9-1) Course Companion 
© Tutor2u (www.tutor2u.net) 2017                                                                                                   P a g e  | 152  
Term Definition 
Survival A business objective where continuing in existence becomes the short term goal 
Sustainability To ensure that production in an economy can continue at the same level in the 
future 
Takeover Where a business acquires another business 
Target market Where customers are segmented to allow businesses to focus its marketing 
policy on meeting their specific requirements 
Target setting An employee process linked to performance reviews that sets goals and 
identifies training needs 
Tariff A tax on imports that increases their price and allows home businesses an 
advantage 
Taxation How the government collects money to fund its expenditure programme and 
influence the economy 
Team leader An employee with responsibilities for the work produced by a group of workers 
Technology How businesses uses machines and devices to improve their operation 
Temporary contract A job where a worker will be employed for a fixed period of time 
Total costs All the costs of a business; calculated as:  
total costs = fixed costs + variable costs 
Trade bloc A group of countries that have free trade within their group and that may 
restrict imports from countries outside of the trade bloc 
Trade credit When a business orders and receives supplies, but pays for them at a later date 
Training How employees learn to do a job 
Unemployment Where people are able, available and willing to work at the going wage but 
cannot find a job 
Unique selling point What makes a business’s goods or services different from its competitors 
Unit costs The average cost of making one unit or item 
Unlimited liability If a business becomes  bankrupt, sole traders and partners are personally liable 
for their business’s debts 
Variable costs Business costs that change with output, such as raw materials 
Venture capital A source of finance normally for small businesses with good growth prospects, 
where the venture capitalist normally takes a stake in the business 
Viral advertising Where an advert is spread through social media by people spreading the 
message through forwarding to their friends and contacts 
Wants What an individual would like, but does not need to survive
